I have a mind to strike thee ere thou speak'st .
Yet if thou say Antony lives , is well , Or friends with Caesar , or not captive to him , I'll set thee in a shower of gold and hail Rich pearls upon thee .
Madam , he's well .
Well said .
And friends with Caesar .
Th' art an honest man .
Caesar and he are greater friends than ever .
Make thee a fortune from me .
But yet , madam , I do not like "But yet." It does allay The good precedence .
Fie upon "But yet." "But yet" is as a jailer to bring forth Some monstrous malefactor .
Prithee , friend , Pour out the pack of matter to mine ear , The good and bad together .
He's friends with Caesar , In state of health , thou say'st , and , thou say'st , free .
Free , madam , no .
I made no such report .
He's bound unto Octavia .
For what good turn ?
For the best turn i' th' bed .
I am pale , Charmian .
Madam , he's married to Octavia .
The most infectious pestilence upon thee !
Good madam , patience .
What say you ?
Hence , horrible villain , or I'll spurn thine eyes Like balls before me !
I'll unhair thy head !
Thou shalt be whipped with wire and stewed in brine , Smarting in ling'ring pickle !
Say 'tis not so , a province I will give thee And make thy fortunes proud .
The blow thou hadst Shall make thy peace for moving me to rage , And I will boot thee with what gift beside Thy modesty can beg .
He's married , madam .
Rogue , thou hast lived too long .
Nay then , I'll run .
What mean you , madam ?
I have made no fault .
Good madam , keep yourself within yourself .
The man is innocent .
Some innocents 'scape not the thunderbolt .
Melt Egypt into Nile , and kindly creatures Turn all to serpents .
Call the slave again .
Though I am mad , I will not bite him .
Call !
He is afeard to come .
I will not hurt him .
These hands do lack nobility that they strike A meaner than myself , since I myself Have given myself the cause .
Come hither , sir .
Though it be honest , it is never good To bring bad news .
Give to a gracious message An host of tongues , but let ill tidings tell Themselves when they be felt .
I have done my duty .
Is he married ?
The gods confound thee !
Dost thou hold there still ?
Should I lie , madam ?
Go , get thee hence .
I crave your highness' pardon .
He is married ?
Take no offense that I would not offend you .
To punish me for what you make me do Seems much unequal .
He's married to Octavia .
Oh , that his fault should make a knave of thee , That art not what th' art sure of !
Get thee hence .
The merchandise which thou hast brought from Rome Are all too dear for me .
Lie they upon thy hand And be undone by 'em !
Good your highness , patience .
In praising Antony , I have dispraised Caesar .
Many times , madam .
I am paid for 't now .
Lead me from hence .
O Iras , Charmian !
Tis no matter. , Go to the fellow , good Alexas .
Bid him Report the feature of Octavia : her years , Her inclination .
Let him not leave out The color of her hair .
Bring me word how tall she is .
Lead me to my chamber .
Lord Alexas , sweet Alexas , most anything Alexas , almost most absolute Alexas , where's the soothsayer that you praised so to th' Queen ?
Oh that I knew this husband , which , you say , must charge his horns with garlands !
I make not , but foresee .
Pray , then , foresee me one .
No , you shall paint when you are old .
Wrinkles forbid !
Vex not his prescience .
Be attentive .
Hush !
You shall be more beloving than beloved .
Most meet That first we come to words , and therefore have we Our written purposes before us sent , Which , if thou hast considered , let us know If 'twill tie up thy discontented sword And carry back to Sicily much tall youth That else must perish here .
What was 't That moved pale Cassius to conspire ?
Take your time .
Thou canst not fear us , Pompey , with thy sails .
We'll speak with thee at sea .
At land , thou know'st How much we do o'ercount thee .
At land indeed Thou dost o'ercount me of my father's house , But since the cuckoo builds not for himself , Remain in 't as thou mayst .
Be pleased to tell us , For this is from the present , how you take The offers we have sent you .
There's the point .
Which do not be entreated to , but weigh What it is worth embraced .
You have made me offer Of Sicily , Sardinia .
And I must Rid all the sea of pirates , then , to send Measures of wheat to Rome .
This 'greed upon To part with unhacked edges and bear back Our targes undinted .
That's our offer .
Know then I came before you here a man prepared To take this offer , but Mark Antony Put me to some impatience .
Let me have your hand .
I did not think , sir , to have met you here .
The beds i' th' East are soft , and thanks to you , That called me timelier than my purpose hither , For I have gained by 't .
Well , I know not What counts harsh Fortune casts upon my face , But in my bosom shall she never come To make my heart her vassal .
Well met here .
I hope so , Lepidus .
Thus we are agreed .
That's the next to do .
We'll feast each other ere we part , and let's Draw lots who shall begin .
That will I , Pompey .
No , Antony , take the lot .
But , first or last , Your fine Egyptian cookery shall have The fame .
I have heard that Julius Caesar Grew fat with feasting there .
You have heard much .
I have fair meanings , sir .
And fair words to them .
Then so much have I heard .
And I have heard Apollodorus carried , What , I pray you ?
How far'st thou , soldier ?
Well , And well am like to do , for I perceive , Four feasts are toward .
Let me shake thy hand .
I never hated thee .
I have seen thee fight When I have envied thy behavior .
Sir , I never loved you much , but I ha' praised ye When you have well deserved ten times as much As I have said you did .
Enjoy thy plainness .
It nothing ill becomes thee. , Aboard my galley I invite you all .
Will you lead , lords ?
Show 's the way , sir .
Come .
At sea , I think .
We have , sir .
You have done well by water .
And you by land .
I will praise any man that will praise me , though it can not be denied what I have done by land .
Nor what I have done by water .
Yes , something you can deny for your own safety : you have been a great thief by sea .
And you by land .
There I deny my land service .
But give me your hand , Menas .
If our eyes had authority , here they might take two thieves kissing .
All men's faces are true , whatsome'er their hands are .
But there is never a fair woman has a true face .
No slander .
They steal hearts .
We came hither to fight with you .
For my part , I am sorry it is turned to a drinking .
Pompey doth this day laugh away his fortune .
If he do , sure he can not weep 't back again .
You've said , sir .
We looked not for Mark Antony here .
Pray you , is he married to Cleopatra ?
Caesar's sister is called Octavia .
True , sir .
She was the wife of Caius Marcellus .
But she is now the wife of Marcus Antonius .
Pray ye , sir ?
Tis true .
Then is Caesar and he forever knit together .
If I were bound to divine of this unity , I would not prophesy so .
I think the policy of that purpose made more in the marriage than the love of the parties .
I think so too .
But you shall find the band that seems to tie their friendship together will be the very strangler of their amity .
Octavia is of a holy , cold , and still conversation .
Who would not have his wife so ?
Not he that himself is not so , which is Mark Antony .
He will to his Egyptian dish again .
Then shall the sighs of Octavia blow the fire up in Caesar , and , as I said before , that which is the strength of their amity shall prove the immediate author of their variance .
Antony will use his affection where it is .
He married but his occasion here .
And thus it may be .
Come , sir , will you aboard ?
I have a health for you .
I shall take it , sir .
We have used our throats in Egypt .
Come , let's away .
Here they'll be , man .
Some o' their plants are ill-rooted already .
Lepidus is high-colored .
They have made him drink alms-drink .
I had as lief have a reed that will do me no service as a partisan I could not heave .
Thus do they , sir : they take the flow o' th' Nile By certain scales i' th' Pyramid .
They know By th' height , the lowness , or the mean , if dearth Or foison follow .
The higher Nilus swells The more it promises .
As it ebbs , the seedsman Upon the slime and ooze scatters his grain , And shortly comes to harvest .
You've strange serpents there ?
Ay , Lepidus .
Your serpent of Egypt is bred now of your mud by the operation of your sun .
I am not so well as I should be , but I'll ne'er out .
Not till you have slept .
I fear me you'll be in till then .
Nay , certainly , I have heard the Ptolemies' pyramises are very goodly things .
Without contradiction I have heard that .
What manner o' thing is your crocodile ?
It is shaped , sir , like itself , and it is as broad as it hath breadth .
It is just so high as it is , and moves with its own organs .
Of it own color too .
Tis a strange serpent .
Tis so .
And the tears of it are wet .
The matter ?
I have ever held my cap off to thy fortunes .
Thou hast served me with much faith .
What's else to say ? , These quicksands , Lepidus , Keep off them , for you sink .
What sayst thou ?
Wilt thou be lord of the whole world ?
That's twice .
How should that be ?
Nay , hear him .
Good now , some excellent fortune !
Let me be married to three kings in a forenoon and widow them all .
Oh , excellent !
Then belike my children shall have no names .
Prithee , how many boys and wenches must I have ?
If every of your wishes had a womb , And fertile every wish , a million .
You think none but your sheets are privy to your wishes .
We'll know all our fortunes .
Mine , and most of our fortunes tonight , shall be , drunk to bed .
Hast thou drunk well ?
No , Pompey , I have kept me from the cup .
Show me which way .
These three world-sharers , these competitors , Are in thy vessel .
All there is thine .
Ah , this thou shouldst have done And not have spoke on 't !
In me 'tis villainy , In thee 't had been good service .
Thou must know , 'Tis not my profit that does lead mine honor ; Mine honor , it .
Repent that e'er thy tongue Hath so betrayed thine act .
Being done unknown , I should have found it afterwards well done , But must condemn it now .
Desist , and drink .
This health to Lepidus !
Here's to thee , Menas !
Enobarbus , welcome .
There's a strong fellow , Menas .
Why ?
He bears The third part of the world , man .
Seest not ?
The third part , then , is drunk .
Drink thou .
Come .
This is not yet an Alexandrian feast .
It ripens towards it .
Strike the vessels , ho !
Here's to Caesar .
I could well forbear 't .
Be a child o' th' time .
But I had rather fast from all four days Than drink so much in one .
Let's ha 't , good soldier .
Come , let's all take hands Till that the conquering wine hath steeped our sense In soft and delicate Lethe .
All take hands .
What needs more words ?
Good night .
And shall , sir .
Give 's your hand .
We are friends .
Come , down into the boat .
Take heed you fall not .
Menas , I'll not on shore .
No , to my cabin .
What !
There's my cap .
Hoo !
Noble captain , come .
Now , darting Parthia , art thou struck , and now Pleased fortune does of Marcus Crassus' death Make me revenger .
For learn this , Silius : Better to leave undone than by our deed Acquire too high a fame when him we serve's away .
Caesar and Antony have ever won More in their officer than person .
Who does i' th' wars more than his captain can Becomes his captain's captain ; and ambition , The soldier's virtue , rather makes choice of loss Than gain which darkens him .
I could do more to do Antonius good , But 'twould offend him , and in his offense Should my performance perish .
Thou hast , Ventidius , that Without the which a soldier and his sword Grants scarce distinction .
Thou wilt write to Antony ?
I'll humbly signify what in his name , That magical word of war , we have effected : How with his banners and his well-paid ranks The ne'er-yet-beaten horse of Parthia We have jaded out o' th' field .
Where is he now ?
What , are the brothers parted ?
They have dispatched with Pompey ; he is gone .
Octavia weeps To part from Rome .
Caesar is sad , and Lepidus , Since Pompey's feast , as Menas says , is troubled With the greensickness .
A very fine one .
Oh , how he loves Caesar !
Nay , but how dearly he adores Mark Antony !
Caesar ?
What's Antony ?
The god of Jupiter .
Spake you of Caesar ?
How , the nonpareil !
O Antony , O thou Arabian bird !
Would you praise Caesar , say "Caesar." Go no further .
Indeed , he plied them both with excellent praises .
But he loves Caesar best ; yet he loves Antony .
Hoo !
Hearts , tongues , figures , scribes , bards , poets , can not Think , speak , cast , write , sing , number , hoo ! , His love to Antony .
Both he loves .
They are his shards , and he
So , This is to horse .
Adieu , noble Agrippa .
Good fortune , worthy soldier , and farewell .
No further , sir .
For better might we Have loved without this mean , if on both parts This be not cherished .
Make me not offended In your distrust .
I have said .
You shall not find , Though you be therein curious , the least cause For what you seem to fear .
So the gods keep you And make the hearts of Romans serve your ends .
We will here part .
Farewell , my dearest sister , fare thee well .
The elements be kind to thee and make Thy spirits all of comfort !
Fare thee well .
My noble brother !
The April's in her eyes ; it is love's spring , And these the showers to bring it on .
What , Octavia ?
I'll tell you in your ear .
Look , here I have you .
Thus I let you go And give you to the gods .
Adieu .
Be happy .
Farewell , farewell .
Farewell .
E'en as the o'erflowing Nilus presageth famine .
Go , you wild bedfellow , you can not soothsay .
Nay , if an oily palm be not a fruitful prognostication , I can not scratch mine ear. , Prithee , tell her but a workaday fortune .
Your fortunes are alike .
But how , but how ?
Give me particulars .
I have said .
Am I not an inch of fortune better than she ?
Well , if you were but an inch of fortune better than I , where would you choose it ?
Not in my husband's nose .
Our worser thoughts heavens mend .
Alexas !
For , as it is a heartbreaking to see a handsome man loose-wived , so it is a deadly sorrow to behold a foul knave uncuckolded .
Therefore , dear Isis , keep decorum , and fortune him accordingly .
Where is the fellow ?
Half afeard to come .
Go to , go to. , Come hither , sir .
Good majesty , Herod of Jewry dare not look upon you But when you are well pleased .
That Herod's head I'll have !
Most gracious majesty !
Didst thou behold Octavia ?
Ay , dread Queen .
Where ?
Madam , in Rome .
I looked her in the face , and saw her led Between her brother and Mark Antony .
Is she as tall as me ?
She is not , madam .
Didst hear her speak ?
Is she shrill-tongued or low ?
Madam , I heard her speak .
She is low-voiced .
That's not so good .
He can not like her long .
Like her ?
O Isis , 'tis impossible .
I think so , Charmian .
She creeps .
She shows a body rather than a life , A statue than a breather .
Is this certain ?
Or I have no observance .
Three in Egypt Can not make better note .
There's nothing in her yet .
The fellow has good judgment .
Excellent .
Charmian , hark .
And I do think she's thirty .
Bear'st thou her face in mind ?
Is 't long or round ?
Round , even to faultiness .
For the most part , too , they are foolish that are so .
Her hair , what color ?
Brown , madam , and her forehead As low as she would wish it .
Thou must not take my former sharpness ill .
I will employ thee back again ; I find thee Most fit for business .
Go make thee ready ; Our letters are prepared .
A proper man .
Indeed , he is so .
I repent me much That so I harried him .
Nothing , madam .
All may be well enough .
I warrant you , madam .
O my good lord , Believe not all , or , if you must believe , Stomach not all .
A more unhappy lady , If this division chance , ne'er stood between , Praying for both parts .
Gentle Octavia , Let your best love draw to that point which seeks Best to preserve it .
The meantime , lady , I'll raise the preparation of a war Shall stain your brother .
The Jove of power make me most weak , most weak , Your reconciler !
When it appears to you where this begins , Turn your displeasure that way , for our faults Can never be so equal that your love Can equally move with them .
Provide your going ; Choose your own company and command what cost Your heart has mind to .
How now , friend Eros !
There's strange news come , sir .
What , man ?
Caesar and Lepidus have made wars upon Pompey .
This is old .
What is the success ?
So the poor third is up , till death enlarge his confine .
Then , world , thou hast a pair of chaps , no more , And throw between them all the food thou hast , They'll grind the one the other .
Where's Antony ?
More , Domitius : My lord desires you presently .
My news I might have told hereafter .
Twill be naught , But let it be .
Bring me to Antony .
Come , sir .
Contemning Rome , he has done all this and more In Alexandria .
Here's the manner of 't : I' th' marketplace , on a tribunal silvered , Cleopatra and himself in chairs of gold Were publicly enthroned .
This in the public eye ?
She In th' habiliments of the goddess Isis That day appeared , and oft before gave audience , As 'tis reported , so .
Let Rome be thus informed .
Who , queasy with his insolence already , Will their good thoughts call from him .
The people knows it , and have now received His accusations .
Who does he accuse ?
Caesar , and that , having in Sicily Sextus Pompeius spoiled , we had not rated him His part o' th' isle .
Then does he say he lent me Some shipping , unrestored .
Sir , this should be answered .
Tis done already , and the messenger gone .
I have told him , Lepidus was grown too cruel , That he his high authority abused And did deserve his change .
He'll never yield to that .
Nor must not then be yielded to in this .
Hail , Caesar , and my lord !
Hail , most dear Caesar !
That ever I should call thee castaway !
You have not called me so , nor have you cause .
Why have you stol'n upon us thus ?
You come not Like Caesar's sister .
The wife of Antony Should have an army for an usher and The neighs of horse to tell of her approach Long ere she did appear .
Nay , the dust Should have ascended to the roof of heaven , Raised by your populous troops .
We should have met you By sea and land , supplying every stage With an augmented greeting .
My lord , Mark Antony , Hearing that you prepared for war , acquainted My grieved ear withal , whereon I begged His pardon for return .
Which soon he granted , Being an obstruct 'tween his lust and him .
Amen .
Hush !
Here comes Antony .
Saw you my lord ?
No , lady .
Was he not here ?
No , madam .
He was disposed to mirth , but on the sudden A Roman thought hath struck him. , Enobarbus !
Madam ?
Here at your service .
My lord approaches .
Fulvia thy wife first came into the field .
Against my brother Lucius ?
Ay .
Do not say so , my lord .
Where is he now ?
My lord , in Athens .
No , my most wronged sister .
Cleopatra Hath nodded him to her .
He hath given his empire Up to a whore ; who now are levying The kings o' th' earth for war .
He hath assembled Bocchus , the King of Libya ; Archelaus , Of Cappadocia ; Philadelphos , King Of Paphlagonia ; the Thracian king , Adallas ; King Manchus of Arabia ; King of Pont ; Herod of Jewry ; Mithridates , King Of Comagen ; Polemon and Amyntas , The Kings of Mede and Lycaonia , With a more larger list of scepters .
Ay me , most wretched , That have my heart parted betwixt two friends That does afflict each other !
Welcome hither .
Your letters did withhold our breaking forth Till we perceived both how you were wrong led And we in negligent danger .
Cheer your heart .
Best of comfort , And ever welcome to us .
Welcome , lady .
Welcome , dear madam .
Each heart in Rome does love and pity you .
Only th' adulterous Antony , most large In his abominations , turns you off And gives his potent regiment to a trull That noises it against us .
Most certain .
Sister , welcome .
Pray you Be ever known to patience .
My dear'st sister !
But why , why , why ?
Thou hast forspoke my being in these wars And sayst it is not fit .
Is 't not denounced against us ?
Why should not we Be there in person ?
What is 't you say ?
Sink Rome !
And their tongues rot That speak against us !
A charge we bear i' th' war , And as the president of my kingdom will Appear there for a man .
Speak not against it .
I will not stay behind .
Nay , I have done .
Here comes the Emperor .
Is it not strange , Canidius , That from Tarentum and Brundusium He could so quickly cut the Ionian sea And take in Toryne ? , You have heard on 't , sweet ?
Celerity is never more admired Than by the negligent .
By sea , what else ?
Why will My lord do so ?
For that he dares us to 't .
So hath my lord dared him to single fight .
Ay , and to wage this battle at Pharsalia , Where Caesar fought with Pompey .
But these offers , Which serve not for his vantage , he shakes off , And so should you .
In Caesar's fleet Are those that often have 'gainst Pompey fought .
Their ships are yare , yours , heavy .
No disgrace Shall fall you for refusing him at sea , Being prepared for land .
I'll fight at sea .
But if we fail , We then can do 't at land .
Thy business ?
The news is true , my lord .
He is descried .
Canidius , Our nineteen legions thou shalt hold by land , And our twelve thousand horse .
How now , worthy soldier ?
O noble Emperor , do not fight by sea !
Trust not to rotten planks .
Do you misdoubt This sword and these my wounds ?
Let th' Egyptians And the Phoenicians go a-ducking .
We Have used to conquer standing on the earth And fighting foot to foot .
Well , well , away .
By Hercules , I think I am i' th' right .
Soldier , thou art ; but his whole action grows Not in the power on 't .
So our leader's led , And we are women's men .
You keep by land The legions and the horse whole , do you not ?
Marcus Octavius , Marcus Justeius , Publicola , and Caelius , are for sea ; But we keep whole by land .
This speed of Caesar's Carries beyond belief .
While he was yet in Rome His power went out in such distractions as Beguiled all spies .
Who's his lieutenant , hear you ?
They say , one Taurus .
Well I know the man .
The Emperor calls Canidius .
With news the time's with labor , and throws forth Each minute some .
Taurus !
My lord ?
Strike not by land ; keep whole .
Provoke not battle Till we have done at sea .
Our fortune lies Upon this jump .
Set we our squadrons on yond side o' th' hill , In eye of Caesar's battle , from which place We may the number of the ships behold And so proceed accordingly .
I can behold no longer .
Gods and goddesses , All the whole synod of them !
What's thy passion ?
The greater cantle of the world is lost With very ignorance .
We have kissed away Kingdoms and provinces .
How appears the fight ?
Yon ribaudred nag of Egypt , Whom leprosy o'ertake ! , i' th' midst o' th' fight , When vantage like a pair of twins appeared Both as the same , or rather ours the elder , The breeze upon her , like a cow in June , Hoists sails and flies .
That I beheld .
Mine eyes did sicken at the sight and could not Endure a further view .
Well , what worst ?
The nature of bad news infects the teller .
When it concerns the fool or coward .
On .
Things that are past are done , with me .
Tis thus : Who tells me true , though in his tale lie death , I hear him as he flattered .
O my lord !
Speak to me home .
Name Cleopatra as she is called in Rome .
Oh , then we bring forth weeds When our quick minds lie still , and our ills told us Is as our earing .
Fare thee well awhile .
I never saw an action of such shame .
Experience , manhood , honor , ne'er before Did violate so itself .
Alack , alack !
Our fortune on the sea is out of breath And sinks most lamentably .
Had our general Been what he knew himself , it had gone well .
Oh , he has given example for our flight Most grossly by his own !
Ay , are you thereabouts ?
Why then , good night indeed .
Toward Peloponnesus are they fled .
To Caesar will I render My legions and my horse .
Hark .
Friends , come hither .
I am so lated in the world that I Have lost my way forever .
I have a ship Laden with gold .
Fly And make your peace with Caesar .
Fly ?
Not we .
I have fled myself , and have instructed cowards To run and show their shoulders .
Friends , begone .
I have myself resolved upon a course Which has no need of you .
Begone .
Oh , I followed that I blush to look upon !
My very hairs do mutiny , for the white Reprove the brown for rashness , and they them For fear and doting .
Friends , begone .
You shall Have letters from me to some friends that will Sweep your way for you .
Pray you , look not sad , Nor make replies of loathness .
Take the hint Which my despair proclaims .
Let that be left Which leaves itself .
To the seaside straightway !
I will possess you of that ship and treasure .
Leave me , I pray , a little .
Pray you now , Nay , do so , for indeed I have lost command .
Why , what else ?
Let me sit down .
Oh , fie , fie , fie !
Madam !
Madam , O good Empress !
The Queen , my lord , the Queen .
Go to him , madam , speak to him .
He is unqualitied with very shame .
Well then , sustain me .
Most noble sir , arise .
The Queen approaches .
Her head's declined , and death will seize her but Your comfort makes the rescue .
I have offended reputation , A most unnoble swerving .
Sir , the Queen .
Oh , whither hast thou led me , Egypt ?
O my lord , my lord , Forgive my fearful sails !
I little thought You would have followed .
Egypt , thou knew'st too well My heart was to thy rudder tied by th' strings , And thou shouldst tow me after .
O'er my spirit Thy full supremacy thou knew'st , and that Thy beck might from the bidding of the gods Command me .
Oh , my pardon !
Now I must To the young man send humble treaties , dodge And palter in the shifts of lowness , who With half the bulk o' th' world played as I pleased , Making and marring fortunes .
You did know How much you were my conqueror , and that My sword , made weak by my affection , would Obey it on all cause .
Fall not a tear , I say .
One of them rates All that is won and lost .
Give me a kiss .
Even this repays me. , We sent our schoolmaster .
Let him appear that's come from Antony .
Know you him ?
Approach and speak .
Such as I am , I come from Antony .
I was of late as petty to his ends As is the morn-dew on the myrtle leaf To his grand sea .
Be 't so .
Declare thine office .
Lord of his fortunes he salutes thee , and Requires to live in Egypt ; which not granted , He lessens his requests , and to thee sues To let him breathe between the heavens and earth A private man in Athens .
This for him .
Next , Cleopatra does confess thy greatness , Submits her to thy might , and of thee craves The circle of the Ptolemies for her heirs , Now hazarded to thy grace .
For Antony , I have no ears to his request .
The Queen Of audience nor desire shall fail , so she From Egypt drive her all-disgraced friend Or take his life there .
This if she perform , She shall not sue unheard .
So to them both .
Fortune pursue thee !
Bring him through the bands .
Caesar , I go .
Observe how Antony becomes his flaw , And what thou think'st his very action speaks In every power that moves .
Caesar , I shall .
What shall we do , Enobarbus ?
Think and die .
Is Antony or we in fault for this ?
Antony only , that would make his will Lord of his reason .
Why should he follow ?
The itch of his affection should not then Have nicked his captainship at such a point When half to half the world opposed , he being The mered question .
Twas a shame no less Than was his loss , to course your flying flags And leave his navy gazing .
Prithee , peace .
Is that his answer ?
Ay , my lord .
The Queen shall then have courtesy , so she Will yield us up ?
He says so .
Let her know 't. , And he will fill thy wishes to the brim With principalities .
That head , my lord ?
A messenger from Caesar .
What , no more ceremony ?
See , my women , Against the blown rose may they stop their nose , That kneeled unto the buds. , Admit him , sir .
At your noble pleasure .
He stays upon your will .
What are you ?
Fulvia thy wife is dead .
Where died she ?
In Sicyon .
Her length of sickness , with what else more serious Importeth thee to know , this bears .
Forbear me .
Caesar's will ?
Hear it apart .
None but friends .
Say boldly .
So haply are they friends to Antony .
He needs as many , sir , as Caesar has , Or needs not us .
If Caesar please , our master Will leap to be his friend .
For us , you know Whose he is we are , and that is Caesar's .
So. , Thus then , thou most renowned : Caesar entreats Not to consider in what case thou stand'st , Further than he is Caesar .
He knows that you embrace not Antony As you did love , but as you feared him .
Oh !
He is a god and knows What is most right .
Mine honor was not yielded , But conquered merely .
Shall I say to Caesar What you require of him ?
For he partly begs To be desired to give .
It much would please him That of his fortunes you should make a staff To lean upon .
But it would warm his spirits To hear from me you had left Antony And put yourself under his shroud , The universal landlord .
What's your name ?
My name is Thidias .
Most kind messenger , Say to great Caesar this in deputation : I kiss his conqu'ring hand .
Tell him I am prompt To lay my crown at 's feet , and there to kneel .
Favors ?
By Jove that thunders !
What art thou , fellow ?
You will be whipped .
Take hence this jack and whip him .
Moon and stars !
Whip him .
Were 't twenty of the greatest tributaries That do acknowledge Caesar , should I find them So saucy with the hand of she here , what's her name Since she was Cleopatra ?
Whip him , fellows , Till like a boy , you see him cringe his face And whine aloud for mercy .
Take him hence .
This jack of Caesar's shall Bear us an errand to him .
Good my lord , You have been a boggler ever .
But when we in our viciousness grow hard , Oh , misery on 't ! , the wise gods seel our eyes , In our own filth drop our clear judgments , make us Adore our errors , laugh at 's while we strut To our confusion .
Oh , is 't come to this ?
I found you as a morsel cold upon Dead Caesar's trencher .
Nay , you were a fragment Of Gneius Pompey's , besides what hotter hours , Unregistered in vulgar fame , you have Luxuriously picked out .
For I am sure , Though you can guess what temperance should be , You know not what it is .
Wherefore is this ?
Soundly , my lord .
Cried he ?
And begged he pardon ?
He did ask favor .
Have you done yet ?
Alack , our terrene moon is now eclipsed , And it portends alone the fall of Antony .
To flatter Caesar , would you mingle eyes With one that ties his points ?
Not know me yet ?
Coldhearted toward me ?
Ah , dear , if I be so , From my cold heart let heaven engender hail , And poison it in the source , and the first stone Drop in my neck .
As it determines , so Dissolve my life !
The next Caesarion smite , Till by degrees the memory of my womb , Together with my brave Egyptians all , By the discandying of this pelleted storm Lie graveless till the flies and gnats of Nile Have buried them for prey !
I am satisfied .
Caesar sits down in Alexandria , where I will oppose his fate .
Our force by land Hath nobly held .
Our severed navy too Have knit again , and fleet , threat'ning most sealike .
Where hast thou been , my heart ?
Dost thou hear , lady ?
If from the field I shall return once more To kiss these lips , I will appear in blood .
I and my sword will earn our chronicle .
There's hope in 't yet .
That's my brave lord !
I will be treble-sinewed , -hearted , -breathed , And fight maliciously .
For when mine hours Were nice and lucky , men did ransom lives Of me for jests ; but now I'll set my teeth And send to darkness all that stop me .
Come , Let's have one other gaudy night .
Call to me All my sad captains .
Let's mock the midnight bell .
It is my birthday .
I had thought t' have held it poor ; but since my lord Is Antony again , I will be Cleopatra .
We will yet do well .
Do so .
We'll speak to them , and tonight I'll force The wine peep through their scars. , Come on , my Queen , There's sap in 't yet .
Now he'll outstare the lightning .
When valor preys on reason , It eats the sword it fights with .
I will seek Some way to leave him .
He calls me "boy" and chides as he had power To beat me out of Egypt .
Let the old ruffian know I have many other ways to die , meantime Laugh at his challenge .
Give him no breath , but now Make boot of his distraction .
Never anger Made good guard for itself .
Let our best heads Know that tomorrow the last of many battles We mean to fight .
Within our files there are , Of those that served Mark Antony but late , Enough to fetch him in .
See it done And feast the army .
We have store to do 't , And they have earned the waste .
Poor Antony !
What's your pleasure , sir ?
I must with haste from hence .
Why , then , we kill all our women .
We see how mortal an unkindness is to them .
If they suffer our departure , death's the word .
I must be gone .
Under a compelling occasion , let women die .
It were pity to cast them away for nothing , though between them and a great cause they should be esteemed nothing .
Cleopatra , catching but the least noise of this , dies instantly .
I have seen her die twenty times upon far poorer moment .
I do think there is mettle in death , which commits some loving act upon her , she hath such a celerity in dying .
She is cunning past man's thought .
We can not call her winds and waters sighs and tears .
He will not fight with me , Domitius ?
No .
Why should he not ?
He thinks , being twenty times of better fortune , He is twenty men to one .
Tomorrow , soldier , By sea and land I'll fight .
Or I will live Or bathe my dying honor in the blood Shall make it live again .
Woo't thou fight well ?
I'll strike and cry , "Take all." Well said .
Come on !
Call forth my household servants .
Let's tonight Be bounteous at our meal .
You have served me well , And kings have been your fellows .
The gods forbid !
Well , my good fellows , wait on me tonight .
Scant not my cups , and make as much of me As when mine empire was your fellow too , And suffered my command .
Look , they weep , And I , an ass , am onion-eyed .
Ho , ho , ho !
Now the witch take me if I meant it thus !
Grace grow where those drops fall !
My hearty friends , You take me in too dolorous a sense , For I spake to you for your comfort , did desire you To burn this night with torches .
Know , my hearts , I hope well of tomorrow , and will lead you Where rather I'll expect victorious life Than death and honor .
Brother , good night .
Tomorrow is the day .
Heard you of nothing strange about the streets ?
Nothing .
What news ?
Belike 'tis but a rumor .
Good night to you .
Well , sir , good night .
Soldiers , have careful watch .
And you .
Here we .
And if tomorrow Our navy thrive , I have an absolute hope Our landmen will stand up .
Tis a brave army , and full of purpose .
Peace !
What noise ?
Hark !
Music i' th' air .
Under the earth .
It signs well , does it not ?
No .
Peace , I say !
What should this mean ?
How now , masters ?
Ay .
Is 't not strange ?
Do you hear , masters ?
Do you hear ?
Follow the noise so far as we have quarter ; Let's see how it will give off .
Content .
Tis strange .
Sleep a little .
Come , good fellow , put thine iron on .
If fortune be not ours today , it is Because we brave her .
Come .
Nay , I'll help too .
What's this for ?
Ah , let be , let be !
Thou art The armorer of my heart .
False , false .
This , this .
Sooth , la , I'll help .
Thus it must be .
Well , well , We shall thrive now. , Seest thou , my good fellow ?
Go put on thy defenses .
Briefly , sir .
Is not this buckled well ?
Rarely , rarely .
Dispatch. , O love , That thou couldst see my wars today , and knew'st The royal occupation !
Good morrow to thee .
Welcome .
Thou look'st like him that knows a warlike charge .
To business that we love we rise betimes And go to 't with delight .
A thousand , sir , Early though 't be , have on their riveted trim And at the port expect you .
The morn is fair .
Good morrow , General .
Good morrow , General .
Tis well blown , lads .
This morning , like the spirit of a youth That means to be of note , begins betimes .
Fare thee well , dame .
Whate'er becomes of me , This is a soldier's kiss .
I'll leave thee Now like a man of steel .
Lead me .
He goes forth gallantly .
The gods make this a happy day to Antony !
Would thou and those thy scars had once prevailed To make me fight at land !
Hadst thou done so , The kings that have revolted , and the soldier That has this morning left thee , would have still Followed thy heels .
Who's gone this morning ?
Who ?
One ever near thee .
Sir , He is with Caesar .
Sir , his chests and treasure He has not with him .
Is he gone ?
Most certain .
Go , Eros , send his treasure after .
Do it .
Detain no jot , I charge thee .
Write to him , I will subscribe , gentle adieus and greetings .
Say that I wish he never find more cause To change a master .
Oh , my fortunes have Corrupted honest men !
Dispatch. , Enobarbus !
Fulvia is dead .
Sir ?
Fulvia is dead .
Fulvia ?
Dead .
Why , sir , give the gods a thankful sacrifice .
If there were no more women but Fulvia , then had you indeed a cut , and the case to be lamented .
This grief is crowned with consolation .
Your old smock brings forth a new petticoat , and indeed the tears live in an onion that should water this sorrow .
The business she hath broached in the state Can not endure my absence .
And the business you have broached here can not be without you , especially that of Cleopatra's , which wholly depends on your abode .
No more light answers .
Let our officers Have notice what we purpose .
I shall break The cause of our expedience to the Queen And get her leave to part .
For not alone The death of Fulvia , with more urgent touches , Do strongly speak to us , but the letters too Of many our contriving friends in Rome Petition us at home .
Much is breeding Which , like the courser's hair , hath yet but life , And not a serpent's poison .
Say our pleasure , To such whose place is under us , requires Our quick remove from hence .
Go forth , Agrippa , and begin the fight .
Our will is Antony be took alive .
Make it so known .
Caesar , I shall .
The time of universal peace is near .
Go charge Agrippa Plant those that have revolted in the vant , That Antony may seem to spend his fury Upon himself .
For this pains Caesar hath hanged him .
Canidius and the rest That fell away have entertainment but No honorable trust .
I have done ill , Of which I do accuse myself so sorely That I will joy no more .
Enobarbus , Antony Hath after thee sent all thy treasure , with His bounty overplus .
The messenger Came on my guard , and at thy tent is now Unloading of his mules .
I give it you .
Mock not , Enobarbus .
I tell you true .
Best you safed the bringer Out of the host .
I must attend mine office , Or would have done 't myself .
Your Emperor Continues still a Jove .
I am alone the villain of the earth , And feel I am so most .
O Antony , Thou mine of bounty , how wouldst thou have paid My better service , when my turpitude Thou dost so crown with gold !
This blows my heart .
If swift thought break it not , a swifter mean Shall outstrike thought , but thought will do 't , I feel .
I fight against thee ?
No , I will go seek Some ditch wherein to die .
The foul'st best fits My latter part of life .
Retire !
We have engaged ourselves too far .
Caesar himself has work , and our oppression Exceeds what we expected .
O my brave Emperor , this is fought indeed !
Had we done so at first , we had droven them home With clouts about their heads .
Thou bleed'st apace .
I had a wound here that was like a "T , " But now 'tis made an "H." They do retire .
We'll beat 'em into bench-holes .
I have yet Room for six scotches more .
They are beaten , sir , and our advantage serves For a fair victory .
Let us score their backs And snatch 'em up , as we take hares , behind !
Tis sport to maul a runner .
I will reward thee Once for thy sprightly comfort and tenfold For thy good valor .
Come thee on .
I'll halt after .
We have beat him to his camp .
Run one before And let the Queen know of our gests .
Tomorrow , Before the sun shall see 's , we'll spill the blood That has today escaped .
Lord of lords !
O infinite virtue , com'st thou smiling from The world's great snare uncaught ?
Mine nightingale , We have beat them to their beds .
What , girl , though gray Do something mingle with our younger brown , yet ha' we A brain that nourishes our nerves and can Get goal for goal of youth .
Behold this man .
He hath fought today As if a god , in hate of mankind , had Destroyed in such a shape .
He has deserved it , were it carbuncled Like holy Phoebus' car .
If we be not relieved within this hour , We must return to th' court of guard .
O bear me witness , night , What man is this ?
Stand close and list him .
Be witness to me , O thou blessed moon , When men revolted shall upon record Bear hateful memory , poor Enobarbus did Before thy face repent .
Enobarbus ?
Peace !
Hark further .
Throw my heart Against the flint and hardness of my fault , Which , being dried with grief , will break to powder And finish all foul thoughts .
O Antony !
Let's speak to him .
Let's hear him , for the things he speaks may concern Caesar .
Let's do so .
But he sleeps .
Swoons rather , for so bad a prayer as his Was never yet for sleep .
Go we to him .
Awake , sir , awake .
Speak to us .
Hear you , sir ?
The hand of death hath raught him .
Let us bear him To th' court of guard .
He is of note .
Our hour Is fully out .
Come on , then .
He may recover yet .
I shall do 't .
Their preparation is today by sea .
We please them not by land .
For both , my lord .
I would they'd fight i' th' fire or i' th' air , We'd fight there too .
But this it is : our foot Upon the hills adjoining to the city Shall stay with us .
To the vales , And hold our best advantage .
Yet they are not joined .
Where yond pine does stand I shall discover all .
I'll bring thee word Straight how 'tis like to go .
Swallows have built In Cleopatra's sails their nests .
All is lost !
This foul Egyptian hath betrayed me .
Triple-turned whore !
Bid them all fly , For when I am revenged upon my charm , I have done all .
Bid them all fly .
Begone !
O sun , thy uprise shall I see no more .
Fortune and Antony part here .
Even here Do we shake hands .
All come to this ?
Betrayed I am .
Oh , this false soul of Egypt !
Ah , thou spell !
Avaunt !
Why is my lord enraged against his love ?
Vanish , or I shall give thee thy deserving , And blemish Caesar's triumph .
Let him take thee And hoist thee up to the shouting plebeians !
Follow his chariot , like the greatest spot Of all thy sex .
Most monsterlike be shown For poor'st diminutives , for dolts , and let Patient Octavia plow thy visage up With her prepared nails !
She dies for 't. , Eros , ho !
Help me , my women !
To th' monument !
There lock yourself and send him word you are dead .
The soul and body rive not more in parting Than greatness going off .
Say that the last I spoke was "Antony , " And word it , prithee , piteously .
Hence , Mardian , And bring me how he takes my death .
Eros , thou yet behold'st me ?
Ay , noble lord .
Thou hast seen these signs .
Ay , my lord .
That which is now a horse , even with a thought The rack dislimns and makes it indistinct As water is in water .
It does , my lord .
My good knave Eros , now thy captain is Even such a body .
Here I am Antony , Yet can not hold this visible shape , my knave .
Nay , weep not , gentle Eros .
Oh , thy vile lady !
She has robbed me of my sword .
Hence , saucy eunuch !
Peace !
She hath betrayed me and shall die the death .
Death of one person can be paid but once , And that she has discharged .
What thou wouldst do Is done unto thy hand .
The last she spake Was "Antony , most noble Antony ! " Then in the midst a tearing groan did break The name of Antony .
It was divided Between her heart and lips .
She rendered life , Thy name so buried in her .
Dead , then ?
Dead .
Unarm , Eros .
Go .
Off , pluck off !
O , cleave , my sides !
Heart , once be stronger than thy continent .
Crack thy frail case ! , Apace , Eros , apace .
No more a soldier .
Bruised pieces , go .
You have been nobly borne .
I will o'ertake thee , Cleopatra , and Weep for my pardon .
Since the torch is out , Lie down and stray no farther .
Now all labor Mars what it does .
Yea , very force entangles Itself with strength .
Seal then , and all is done. , Eros ! , I come , my Queen. , Eros ! , Stay for me .
Where souls do couch on flowers , we'll hand in hand , And with our sprightly port make the ghosts gaze .
Dido and her Aeneas shall want troops , And all the haunt be ours. , Come , Eros , Eros !
What would my lord ?
Since Cleopatra died I have lived in such dishonor that the gods Detest my baseness .
Do 't .
The time is come .
Thou strik'st not me , 'tis Caesar thou defeat'st .
Put color in thy cheek .
The gods withhold me !
Shall I do that which all the Parthian darts , Though enemy , lost aim and could not ?
Eros , Wouldst thou be windowed in great Rome and see Thy master thus with pleached arms , bending down His corrigible neck , his face subdued To penetrative shame , whilst the wheeled seat Of fortunate Caesar , drawn before him , branded His baseness that ensued ?
I would not see 't .
Draw that thy honest sword , which thou hast worn Most useful for thy country .
O sir , pardon me !
When I did make thee free , swor'st thou not then To do this when I bade thee ?
Do it at once , Or thy precedent services are all But accidents unpurposed .
Draw and come .
Turn from me then that noble countenance Wherein the worship of the whole world lies .
Lo thee !
Where is he ?
I did not see him since .
What should I do I do not ?
In each thing give him way .
Cross him in nothing .
Tempt him not so too far .
I wish , forbear .
In time we hate that which we often fear .
But here comes Antony .
I am sick and sullen .
I am sorry to give breathing to my purpose , Help me away , dear Charmian !
I shall fall .
My sword is drawn .
My dear master , My captain , and my emperor , let me say , Before I strike this bloody stroke , farewell .
Tis said , man , and farewell .
Farewell , great chief .
Shall I strike now ?
Now , Eros .
Why , there then !
Thus I do escape the sorrow Of Antony's death .
My Queen and Eros Have by their brave instruction got upon me A nobleness in record .
To do thus I learned of thee .
How !
Not dead ?
Oh , dispatch me !
What's the noise ?
I have done my work ill , friends .
Oh , make an end Of what I have begun !
The star is fall'n .
And time is at his period .
Alas , and woe !
Let him that loves me strike me dead .
Not I .
Nor I .
Nor anyone .
Thy death and fortunes bid thy followers fly .
This sword but shown to Caesar , with this tidings , Shall enter me with him .
Where's Antony ?
There , Diomed , there .
Lives he ?
Wilt thou not answer , man ?
Art thou there , Diomed ?
Draw thy sword and give me Sufficing strokes for death .
Most absolute lord , My mistress Cleopatra sent me to thee .
When did she send thee ?
Now , my lord .
Where is she ?
Locked in her monument .
She had a prophesying fear Of what hath come to pass .
For when she saw , Which never shall be found , you did suspect She had disposed with Caesar , and that your rage Would not be purged , she sent you word she was dead .
Too late , good Diomed .
Call my guard , I prithee .
What ho , the Emperor's guard !
Bear me , good friends , where Cleopatra bides .
Tis the last service that I shall command you .
Woe , woe are we , sir , you may not live to wear All your true followers out .
Most heavy day !
Nay , good my fellows , do not please sharp fate To grace it with your sorrows .
Bid that welcome Which comes to punish us , and we punish it , Seeming to bear it lightly .
Take me up .
I have led you oft ; carry me now , good friends , And have my thanks for all .
O Charmian , I will never go from hence .
Be comforted , dear madam .
No , I will not .
All strange and terrible events are welcome , But comforts we despise .
Our size of sorrow , Proportioned to our cause , must be as great As that which makes it .
How now ?
Is he dead ?
His death's upon him , but not dead .
O Antony , Antony , Antony !
Help , Charmian , help , Iras , help !
Peace !
Not Caesar's valor hath o'erthrown Antony , But Antony's hath triumphed on itself .
So it should be , that none but Antony Should conquer Antony , but woe 'tis so !
Nay , but this dotage of our general's O'erflows the measure .
Those his goodly eyes , That o'er the files and musters of the war Have glowed like plated Mars , now bend , now turn The office and devotion of their view Upon a tawny front .
His captain's heart , Which in the scuffles of great fights hath burst The buckles on his breast , reneges all temper And is become the bellows and the fan To cool a gypsy's lust .
Look where they come .
Take but good note , and you shall see in him The triple pillar of the world transformed Into a strumpet's fool .
Behold and see .
If it be love indeed , tell me how much .
There's beggary in the love that can be reckoned .
I'll set a bourn how far to be beloved .
Then must thou needs find out new heaven , new earth .
News , my good lord , from Rome .
I am dying , Egypt , dying .
Only I here importune death awhile , until Of many thousand kisses the poor last I lay upon thy lips .
I dare not , dear , Dear my lord , pardon , I dare not , Lest I be taken .
Not th' imperious show Of the full-fortuned Caesar ever shall Be brooched with me .
If knife , drugs , serpents , have Edge , sting , or operation , I am safe .
Your wife Octavia , with her modest eyes And still conclusion , shall acquire no honor Demuring upon me .
Assist , good friends .
Oh , quick , or I am gone .
Here's sport indeed !
How heavy weighs my lord !
Had I great Juno's power , The strong-winged Mercury should fetch thee up And set thee by Jove's side .
And welcome , welcome !
Die when thou hast lived .
Had my lips that power , Thus would I wear them out .
A heavy sight !
I am dying , Egypt , dying .
Give me some wine and let me speak a little .
My resolution and my hands I'll trust , None about Caesar .
Now my spirit is going .
I can no more .
Noblest of men , woo't die ?
Hast thou no care of me ?
Shall I abide In this dull world , which in thy absence is No better than a sty ?
My lord !
Oh , withered is the garland of the war .
The soldier's pole is fall'n !
Young boys and girls Are level now with men .
The odds is gone , And there is nothing left remarkable Beneath the visiting moon .
She's dead too , our sovereign .
Lady !
Madam !
O madam , madam , madam !
Royal Egypt , Empress !
Peace , peace , Iras .
No more but e'en a woman , and commanded By such poor passion as the maid that milks And does the meanest chares .
All's but naught .
How do you , women ?
What , what , good cheer !
Why , how now , Charmian ?
My noble girls !
Good sirs , take heart .
We'll bury him , and then , what's brave , what's noble , Let's do 't after the high Roman fashion And make death proud to take us .
Come , away .
This case of that huge spirit now is cold .
Ah , women , women !
Come .
We have no friend But resolution , and the briefest end .
Go to him , Dolabella , bid him yield .
Being so frustrate , tell him , he mocks The pauses that he makes .
Caesar , I shall .
Wherefore is that ?
And what art thou that dar'st Appear thus to us ?
I am called Dercetus .
Mark Antony I served , who best was worthy Best to be served .
Whilst he stood up and spoke , He was my master , and I wore my life To spend upon his haters .
If thou pleasest not , I yield thee up my life .
What is 't thou say'st ?
I say , O Caesar , Antony is dead .
The breaking of so great a thing should make A greater crack .
The round world Should have shook lions into civil streets And citizens to their dens .
The death of Antony Is not a single doom .
In the name lay A moiety of the world .
Now , my dearest Queen , Pray you , stand farther from me .
What's the matter ?
I know by that same eye there's some good news .
What , says the married woman you may go ?
Would she had never given you leave to come !
Let her not say 'tis I that keep you here .
I have no power upon you .
Hers you are .
The gods best know , Oh never was there queen So mightily betrayed !
Yet at the first I saw the treasons planted .
Cleopatra , Why should I think you can be mine , and true , Though you in swearing shake the throned gods , Who have been false to Fulvia ?
Riotous madness , To be entangled with those mouth-made vows Which break themselves in swearing !
When you sued staying , Then was the time for words .
No going then !
Eternity was in our lips and eyes , Bliss in our brows' bent , none our parts so poor But was a race of heaven .
They are so still , Or thou , the greatest soldier of the world , Art turned the greatest liar .
This is his sword .
I robbed his wound of it .
Behold it stained With his most noble blood .
Look you , sad friends , The gods rebuke me , but it is tidings To wash the eyes of kings .
His taints and honors Waged equal with him .
A rarer spirit never Did steer humanity , but you gods will give us Some faults to make us men .
Caesar is touched .
I must perforce Have shown to thee such a declining day , Or look on thine .
Hear me , good friends ,
But I will tell you at some meeter season .
The business of this man looks out of him .
We'll hear him what he says .
Bid her have good heart .
She soon shall know of us , by some of ours , How honorable and how kindly we Determine for her , for Caesar can not live To be ungentle .
So the gods preserve thee !
Come hither , Proculeius .
Go and say We purpose her no shame .
Go , And with your speediest bring us what she says And how you find of her .
Caesar , I shall .
Gallus , go you along .
Where's Dolabella , To second Proculeius ?
Dolabella !
Let him alone , for I remember now How he's employed .
He shall in time be ready .
Go with me and see What I can show in this .
Tis paltry to be Caesar .
Not being Fortune , he's but Fortune's knave , A minister of her will .
Caesar sends greeting to the Queen of Egypt , And bids thee study on what fair demands Thou mean'st to have him grant thee .
What's thy name ?
My name is Proculeius .
Antony Did tell me of you , bade me trust you , but I do not greatly care to be deceived , That have no use for trusting .
If your master Would have a queen his beggar , you must tell him , That majesty , to keep decorum , must No less beg than a kingdom .
If he please To give me conquered Egypt for my son , He gives me so much of mine own as I Will kneel to him with thanks .
Be of good cheer .
You're fall'n into a princely hand .
Fear nothing .
Let me report to him Your sweet dependency , and you shall find A conqueror that will pray in aid for kindness Where he for grace is kneeled to .
Pray you , tell him I am his fortune's vassal , and I send him The greatness he has got .
I hourly learn A doctrine of obedience , and would gladly Look him i' th' face .
This I'll report , dear lady .
You see how easily she may be surprised .
Royal Queen !
O Cleopatra !
Hold , worthy lady , hold !
Do not yourself such wrong , who are in this Relieved but not betrayed .
What , of death too , That rids our dogs of languish ?
Cleopatra , Do not abuse my master's bounty by Th' undoing of yourself .
Let the world see His nobleness well acted , which your death Will never let come forth .
Where art thou , Death ?
Come hither , come !
Come , come and take a queen Worth many babes and beggars !
Oh , temperance , lady !
This mortal house I'll ruin , Do Caesar what he can .
Know , sir , that I Will not wait pinioned at your master's court , Nor once be chastised with the sober eye Of dull Octavia .
Shall they hoist me up And show me to the shouting varletry Of censuring Rome ?
Rather a ditch in Egypt Be gentle grave unto me .
Rather on Nilus' mud Lay me stark naked and let the waterflies Blow me into abhorring .
Rather make My country's high pyramides my gibbet And hang me up in chains !
You do extend These thoughts of horror further than you shall Find cause in Caesar .
Proculeius , What thou hast done thy master Caesar knows , And he hath sent for thee .
For the Queen , I'll take her to my guard .
So , Dolabella , It shall content me best .
Be gentle to her .
Most noble Empress , you have heard of me ?
I can not tell .
You laugh when boys or women tell their dreams .
Is 't not your trick ?
I understand not , madam .
I dreamt there was an emperor Antony .
Oh , such another sleep , that I might see But such another man !
His reared arm Crested the world .
For his bounty , There was no winter in 't , an autumn 'twas That grew the more by reaping .
In his livery Walked crowns and crownets .
Realms and islands were As plates dropped from his pocket .
Cleopatra , Think you there was or might be such a man As this I dreamt of ?
Gentle madam , no .
You lie up to the hearing of the gods .
Nature wants stuff To vie strange forms with fancy , yet t' imagine An Antony were nature's piece 'gainst fancy , Condemning shadows quite .
Hear me , good madam .
Your loss is as yourself , great , and you bear it As answering to the weight .
Would I might never O'ertake pursued success , but I do feel , By the rebound of yours , a grief that smites My very heart at root .
I thank you , sir .
Know you what Caesar means to do with me ?
I am loath to tell you what I would you knew .
Arise , you shall not kneel .
I pray you , rise .
Sir , the gods Will have it thus .
Take to you no hard thoughts .
I'll take my leave .
And may , through all the world !
Tis yours , and we , Your scutcheons and your signs of conquest , shall Hang in what place you please .
Here , my good lord .
How now , lady ?
I would I had thy inches .
Thou shouldst know There were a heart in Egypt .
Hear me , Queen : The strong necessity of time commands Our services awhile , but my full heart Remains in use with you .
Our Italy Shines o'er with civil swords .
Sextus Pompeius Makes his approaches to the port of Rome .
My more particular , And that which most with you should safe my going , Is Fulvia's death .
Can Fulvia die ?
She's dead , my Queen .
You shall advise me in all for Cleopatra .
This is the brief of money , plate , and jewels I am possessed of .
Tis exactly valued , Not petty things admitted .
Where's Seleucus ?
Here , madam .
This is my treasurer .
Let him speak , my lord , Upon his peril , that I have reserved To myself nothing .
Madam , I had rather seal my lips Than to my peril speak that which is not .
What have I kept back ?
Enough to purchase what you have made known .
Nay , blush not , Cleopatra .
See , Caesar !
Oh , behold How pomp is followed !
The ingratitude of this Seleucus does Even make me wild .
Thou shalt Go back , I warrant thee !
But I'll catch thine eyes , Though they had wings .
Oh , rarely base !
Cleopatra , Not what you have reserved nor what acknowledged Put we i' th' roll of conquest .
Still be 't yours .
Bestow it at your pleasure , and believe Caesar's no merchant , to make prize with you Of things that merchants sold .
Therefore be cheered .
No , dear Queen , For we intend so to dispose you as Yourself shall give us counsel .
Feed and sleep .
Our care and pity is so much upon you That we remain your friend .
And so , adieu .
My master , and my lord !
Not so .
Adieu .
But , hark thee , Charmian .
Finish , good lady .
Madam , I will .
Where's the Queen ?
Behold , sir .
Dolabella !
Make your best use of this .
I have performed Your pleasure and my promise .
Dolabella , I shall remain your debtor .
I your servant .
Adieu , good Queen .
I must attend on Caesar .
Farewell , and thanks .
Now , Iras , what think'st thou ?
Thou an Egyptian puppet shalt be shown In Rome , as well as I .
Mechanic slaves With greasy aprons , rules , and hammers shall Uplift us to the view .
The gods forbid !
Nay , 'tis most certain , Iras .
Oh , the good gods !
Nay , that's certain .
I'll never see 't !
For I am sure mine nails Are stronger than mine eyes .
Why , that's the way To fool their preparation and to conquer Their most absurd intents .
Now , Charmian !
Show me , my women , like a queen .
Go fetch My best attires .
Wherefore's this noise ?
Here is a rural fellow That will not be denied your Highness' presence .
He brings you figs .
Let him come in .
What poor an instrument May do a noble deed !
He brings me liberty .
My resolution's placed , and I have nothing Of woman in me .
Now from head to foot I am marble-constant .
Now the fleeting moon No planet is of mine .
This is the man .
Avoid , and leave him .
Hast thou the pretty worm of Nilus there , That kills and pains not ?
Truly , I have him , but I would not be the party that should desire you to touch him , for his biting is immortal .
Those that do die of it do seldom or never recover .
Remember'st thou any that have died on 't ?
Very many , men and women too .
Truly , she makes a very good report o' th' worm .
But he that will believe all that they say shall never be saved by half that they do .
But this is most falliable , the worm's an odd worm .
I wish you all joy of the worm .
Farewell .
You must think this , look you , that the worm will do his kind .
Ay , ay .
Farewell .
Look you , the worm is not to be trusted but in the keeping of wise people , for indeed there is no goodness in the worm .
Very good .
Will it eat me ?
You must not think I am so simple but I know the devil himself will not eat a woman .
Well , get thee gone .
Farewell .
Give me my robe .
Put on my crown .
I have Immortal longings in me .
Yare , yare , good Iras , quick .
Methinks I hear Antony call .
I see him rouse himself To praise my noble act .
I hear him mock The luck of Caesar , which the gods give men To excuse their after wrath. , Husband , I come !
Now to that name my courage prove my title !
I am fire and air , my other elements I give to baser life. , So , have you done ?
Come then and take the last warmth of my lips .
Farewell , kind Charmian .
Iras , long farewell .
Have I the aspic in my lips ?
Dost fall ?
If thou and nature can so gently part , The stroke of death is as a lover's pinch , Which hurts , and is desired .
Dost thou lie still ?
If thus thou vanishest , thou tell'st the world It is not worth leave-taking .
Dissolve , thick cloud , and rain , that I may say The gods themselves do weep !
Come , thou mortal wretch , With thy sharp teeth this knot intrinsicate Of life at once untie .
Poor venomous fool Be angry and dispatch .
Oh , couldst thou speak , That I might hear thee call great Caesar ass Unpolicied !
O eastern star !
Peace , peace !
Dost thou not see my baby at my breast , That sucks the nurse asleep ?
As sweet as balm , as soft as air , as gentle , O Antony ! , Nay , I will take thee too .
What should I stay , In this wild world ?
So , fare thee well .
Now boast thee , Death , in thy possession lies A lass unparalleled .
Downy windows , close ,
And golden Phoebus never be beheld Of eyes again so royal !
Your crown's awry .
I'll mend it and then play , Where's the Queen ?
Speak softly .
Wake her not .
Caesar hath sent , Too slow a messenger .
Oh , come apace , dispatch !
I partly feel thee .
There's Dolabella sent from Caesar .
Call him .
What work is here , Charmian ?
Is this well done ?
It is well done and fitting for a princess Descended of so many royal kings .
Ah , soldier !
How goes it here ?
All dead .
Caesar , thy thoughts Touch their effects in this .
Thyself art coming To see performed the dreaded act which thou So sought'st to hinder .
O most false love !
Where be the sacred vials thou shouldst fill With sorrowful water ?
Now I see , I see , In Fulvia's death how mine received shall be .
By the fire That quickens Nilus' slime , I go from hence Thy soldier , servant , making peace or war As thou affects .
Cut my lace , Charmian , come !
But let it be .
I am quickly ill , and well , So Antony loves .
My precious Queen , forbear , And give true evidence to his love which stands An honorable trial .
So Fulvia told me .
I prithee , turn aside and weep for her .
Then bid adieu to me , and say the tears Belong to Egypt .
O sir , you are too sure an augurer .
That you did fear is done .
The manner of their deaths ?
I do not see them bleed .
Who was last with them ?
A simple countryman that brought her figs .
This was his basket .
Poisoned , then .
Oh , Caesar , This Charmian lived but now .
She stood and spake .
I found her trimming up the diadem On her dead mistress .
Tremblingly she stood And on the sudden dropped .
Oh , noble weakness !
Here on her breast There is a vent of blood , and something blown .
The like is on her arm .
This is an aspic's trail , and these fig leaves Have slime upon them , such as th' aspic leaves Upon the caves of Nile .
Take up her bed And bear her women from the monument .
She shall be buried by her Antony .
No grave upon the earth shall clip in it A pair so famous .
Our army shall In solemn show attend this funeral , And then to Rome .
Come , Dolabella , see High order in this great solemnity .
You'll heat my blood .
No more .
You can do better yet , but this is meetly .
Now , by my sword , And target .
I'll leave you , lady .
Courteous lord , one word .
Sir , you and I must part , but that's not it .
Tis sweating labor To bear such idleness so near the heart As Cleopatra this .
But , sir , forgive me , Since my becomings kill me when they do not Eye well to you .
Your honor calls you hence .
Therefore be deaf to my unpitied folly , And all the gods go with you !
Upon your sword Sit laurel victory , and smooth success Be strewed before your feet .
Let us go .
Come .
Our separation so abides and flies That thou , residing here , goes yet with me , And I , hence fleeting , here remain with thee .
You are too indulgent .
Say this becomes him , As his composure must be rare indeed Whom these things can not blemish , yet must Antony No way excuse his foils when we do bear So great weight in his lightness .
If he filled His vacancy with his voluptuousness , Full surfeits and the dryness of his bones Call on him for 't .
Here's more news .
Pompey is strong at sea , And it appears he is beloved of those That only have feared Caesar .
I should have known no less .
It hath been taught us from the primal state That he which is was wished until he were , And the ebbed man , ne'er loved till ne'er worth love , Comes deared by being lacked .
Caesar , I bring thee word Menecrates and Menas , famous pirates , Make the sea serve them , which they ear and wound With keels of every kind .
Many hot inroads They make in Italy , the borders maritime Lack blood to think on 't , and flush youth revolt .
Antony , Leave thy lascivious wassails .
When thou once Wast beaten from Modena , where thou slew'st Hirtius and Pansa , consuls , at thy heel Did famine follow , whom thou fought'st against , Though daintily brought up , with patience more Than savages could suffer .
Thou didst drink The stale of horses and the gilded puddle Which beasts would cough at .
Tis pity of him .
Let his shames quickly Drive him to Rome .
Tis time we twain Did show ourselves i' th' field , and to that end Assemble we immediate council .
Pompey Thrives in our idleness .
Tomorrow , Caesar , I shall be furnished to inform you rightly Both what by sea and land I can be able To front this present time .
Till which encounter It is my business too .
Farewell .
Farewell , my lord .
Charmian !
Madam ?
That I might sleep out this great gap of time My Antony is away .
You think of him too much .
Oh , 'tis treason !
Madam , I trust , not so .
What's your highness' pleasure ?
Not now to hear thee sing .
I take no pleasure In aught an eunuch has .
Tis well for thee That , being unseminared , thy freer thoughts May not fly forth of Egypt .
Hast thou affections ?
Yes , gracious madam .
Indeed ?
Not in deed , madam , for I can do nothing But what indeed is honest to be done .
Stands he or sits he ?
Or does he walk ?
Or is he on his horse ?
O happy horse , to bear the weight of Antony !
He's speaking now , Or murmuring "Where's my serpent of old Nile ? " For so he calls me .
Now I feed myself With most delicious poison .
Think on me , That am with Phoebus' amorous pinches black And wrinkled deep in time .
Nay , hear them , Antony .
Perform 't , or else we damn thee." How , my love ?
Perchance ?
Nay , and most like .
You must not stay here longer .
Call in the messengers .
As I am Egypt's queen , Thou blushest , Antony , and that blood of thine Is Caesar's homager .
The messengers !
Sovereign of Egypt , hail !
How much unlike art thou Mark Antony !
Yet , coming from him , that great med'cine hath With his tinct gilded thee .
How goes it with my brave Mark Antony ?
Last thing he did , dear Queen , He kissed , the last of many doubled kisses , This orient pearl .
Mine ear must pluck it thence .
Good friend , " quoth he , "Say the firm Roman to great Egypt sends This treasure of an oyster , at whose foot , To mend the petty present , I will piece Her opulent throne with kingdoms .
All the East , Say thou , shall call her mistress." So he nodded , And soberly did mount an arm-gaunt steed , Who neighed so high that what I would have spoke Was beastly dumbed by him .
What was he , sad or merry ?
Like to the time o' th' year between the extremes Of hot and cold , he was nor sad nor merry .
Note him , Note him , good Charmian , 'tis the man , but note him .
He was not sad , for he would shine on those That make their looks by his .
He was not merry , Which seemed to tell them his remembrance lay In Egypt with his joy , but between both .
O heavenly mingle !
Be'st thou sad or merry , The violence of either thee becomes , So does it no man else. , Mett'st thou my posts ?
Ay , madam , twenty several messengers .
Why do you send so thick ?
Who's born that day When I forget to send to Antony Shall die a beggar .
Ink and paper , Charmian .
Welcome , my good Alexas .
Did I , Charmian , Ever love Caesar so ?
Oh , that brave Caesar !
Be choked with such another emphasis !
Say , "the brave Antony." The valiant Caesar !
By Isis , I will give thee bloody teeth If thou with Caesar paragon again My man of men .
By your most gracious pardon , I sing but after you .
My salad days , When I was green in judgment , cold in blood , To say as I said then .
We , ignorant of ourselves , Beg often our own harms , which the wise powers Deny us for our good , so find we profit By losing of our prayers .
I shall do well .
The people love me , and the sea is mine .
My powers are crescent , and my auguring hope Says it will come to th' full .
Mark Antony In Egypt sits at dinner , and will make No wars without doors .
Caesar gets money where He loses hearts .
Lepidus flatters both , Of both is flattered , but he neither loves , Nor either cares for him .
Caesar and Lepidus Are in the field .
A mighty strength they carry .
Where have you this ?
Tis false .
From Silvius , sir .
He dreams .
I know they are in Rome together Looking for Antony .
But all the charms of love , Salt Cleopatra , soften thy wanned lip !
Let witchcraft join with beauty , lust with both .
Tie up the libertine in a field of feasts , Keep his brain fuming .
This is most certain that I shall deliver : Mark Antony is every hour in Rome Expected .
Since he went from Egypt 'tis A space for farther travel .
His soldiership Is twice the other twain .
But let us rear The higher our opinion , that our stirring Can from the lap of Egypt's widow pluck The ne'er lust-wearied Antony .
I can not hope Caesar and Antony shall well greet together .
I know not , Menas , How lesser enmities may give way to greater .
Be 't as our gods will have 't .
It only stands Our lives upon to use our strongest hands .
Come , Menas .
Good Enobarbus , 'tis a worthy deed , And shall become you well , to entreat your captain To soft and gentle speech .
I shall entreat him To answer like himself .
By Jupiter , Were I the wearer of Antonio's beard , I would not shave 't today .
Tis not a time for private stomaching .
But small to greater matters must give way .
Not if the small come first .
Here comes the noble Antony .
And yonder , Caesar .
Tis spoken well .
Were we before our armies , and to fight , I should do thus .
Welcome to Rome .
Thank you .
Sit .
Sit , sir .
Nay , then .
I must be laughed at If or for nothing or a little , I Should say myself offended , and with you Chiefly i' th' world ; more laughed at , that I should Once name you derogately , when to sound your name It not concerned me .
My being in Egypt , Caesar , what was 't to you ?
No more than my residing here at Rome Might be to you in Egypt .
Yet if you there Did practice on my state , your being in Egypt Might be my question .
How intend you , "practiced" ?
You may be pleased to catch at mine intent By what did here befall me .
Your wife and brother Made wars upon me , and their contestation Was theme for you .
You were the word of war .
You do mistake your business .
My brother never Did urge me in his act .
Did he not rather Discredit my authority with yours , And make the wars alike against my stomach , Having alike your cause ?
Of this my letters Before did satisfy you .
If you'll patch a quarrel , As matter whole you have to make it with , It must not be with this .
You praise yourself By laying defects of judgment to me , but You patched up your excuses .
Not so , not so .
I know you could not lack , I am certain on 't , Very necessity of this thought , that I , Your partner in the cause 'gainst which he fought , Could not with graceful eyes attend those wars Which fronted mine own peace .
As for my wife , I would you had her spirit in such another .
The third o' th' world is yours , which with a snaffle You may pace easy , but not such a wife .
For that you must But say I could not help it .
I wrote to you When rioting in Alexandria .
Three kings I had newly feasted , and did want Of what I was i' th' morning .
But next day I told him of myself , which was as much As to have asked him pardon .
Let this fellow Be nothing of our strife .
Hear the ambassadors .
No messenger but thine , and all alone Tonight we'll wander through the streets and note The qualities of people .
You have broken The article of your oath , which you shall never Have tongue to charge me with .
Soft , Caesar .
No , Lepidus , let him speak .
The honor is sacred which he talks on now , Supposing that I lacked it. , But , on , Caesar .
The article of my oath ?
To lend me arms and aid when I required them , The which you both denied .
Neglected , rather , And then when poisoned hours had bound me up From mine own knowledge .
Tis noble spoken .
If it might please you to enforce no further The griefs between ye , to forget them quite Were to remember that the present need Speaks to atone you .
Worthily spoken , Maecenas .
Or , if you borrow one another's love for the instant , you may , when you hear no more words of Pompey , return it again .
You shall have time to wrangle in when you have nothing else to do .
Thou art a soldier only .
Therefore speak no more .
Go to , then .
Give me leave , Caesar .
Speak , Agrippa .
Thou hast a sister by the mother's side , Admired Octavia .
Great Mark Antony Is now a widower .
Say not so , Agrippa .
If Cleopatra heard you , your reproof Were well deserved of rashness .
I am not married , Caesar .
Let me hear Agrippa further speak .
By this marriage , All little jealousies , which now seem great , And all great fears , which now import their dangers , Would then be nothing .
Her love to both Would each to other and all loves to both Draw after her .
Will Caesar speak ?
The power of Caesar , and His power unto Octavia .
May I never To this good purpose , that so fairly shows , Dream of impediment !
There's my hand .
A sister I bequeath you whom no brother Did ever love so dearly .
Let her live To join our kingdoms and our hearts , and never Fly off our loves again !
Happily , amen !
I did not think to draw my sword 'gainst Pompey , For he hath laid strange courtesies and great Of late upon me .
Time calls upon 's .
Of us must Pompey presently be sought , Or else he seeks out us .
Where lies he ?
What is his strength by land ?
Great and increasing .
But by sea he is an absolute master .
So is the fame .
Let us , Lepidus , not lack your company .
Noble Antony , not sickness should detain me .
Good Enobarbus !
We have cause to be glad that matters are so well digested .
You stayed well by 't in Egypt .
Eight wild boars roasted whole at a breakfast , and but twelve persons there !
Is this true ?
This was but as a fly by an eagle .
We had much more monstrous matter of feast , which worthily deserved noting .
She's a most triumphant lady , if report be square to her .
I will tell you .
The poop was beaten gold , Purple the sails , and so perfumed that The winds were lovesick with them .
The oars were silver , Which to the tune of flutes kept stroke , and made The water which they beat to follow faster , As amorous of their strokes .
On each side her Stood pretty dimpled boys , like smiling Cupids , With divers-colored fans , whose wind did seem To glow the delicate cheeks which they did cool , And what they undid did .
Oh , rare for Antony !
Upon her landing , Antony sent to her , Invited her to supper .
She replied It should be better he became her guest , Which she entreated .
Royal wench !
Now Antony must leave her utterly .
Age can not wither her , nor custom stale Her infinite variety .
Other women cloy The appetites they feed , but she makes hungry Where most she satisfies , for vilest things Become themselves in her , that the holy priests Bless her when she is riggish .
Let us go .
Good Enobarbus , make yourself my guest Whilst you abide here .
Humbly , sir , I thank you .
All which time Before the gods my knee shall bow my prayers To them for you .
Good night .
If you can , your reason ?
But yet hie you to Egypt again .
Say to me whose fortunes shall rise higher , Caesar's or mine ?
Caesar's .
Therefore , O Antony , stay not by his side .
Thy daemon , that thy spirit which keeps thee , is Noble , courageous , high , unmatchable Where Caesar's is not .
But near him thy angel Becomes afeard , as being o'erpowered .
Therefore Make space enough between you .
Rest you happy !
Speak this no more .
To none but thee , no more but when to thee .
If thou dost play with him at any game , Thou art sure to lose , and of that natural luck He beats thee 'gainst the odds .
Thy luster thickens When he shines by .
I will to Egypt .
And though I make this marriage for my peace , I' th' East my pleasure lies .
O come , Ventidius .
You must to Parthia .
Your commission's ready .
Follow me and receive 't .
Trouble yourselves no further .
Pray you , hasten Your generals after .
Sir , Mark Antony Will e'en but kiss Octavia , and we'll follow .
Till I shall see you in your soldiers' dress , Which will become you both , farewell .
Your way is shorter .
My purposes do draw me much about .
You'll win two days upon me .
Sir , good success .
Farewell .
Give me some music .
Music , moody food Of us that trade in love .
The music , ho !
Let it alone .
Let's to billiards .
Come , Charmian .
My arm is sore .
As well as I can , madam .
I'll none now .
Give me mine angle .
We'll to th' river .
There , My music playing far off , I will betray Tawny-finned fishes .
Ram thou thy fruitful tidings in mine ears , That long time have been barren .
Madam , madam , Antonio's dead !
If thou say so , villain , Thou kill'st thy mistress .
But well and free , If thou so yield him , there is gold , and here My bluest veins to kiss , a hand that kings Have lipped , and trembled kissing .
First , madam , he is well .
Why , there's more gold .
But , sirrah , mark , we use To say the dead are well .
Bring it to that , The gold I give thee will I melt and pour Down thy ill-uttering throat .
Good madam , hear me .
Well , go to , I will .
But there's no goodness in thy face , if Antony Be free and healthful , so tart a favor To trumpet such good tidings !
If that you were the good Sir Rowland's son , As you have whispered faithfully you were , And as mine eye doth his effigies witness Most truly limned and living in your face , Be truly welcome hither .
I am the duke That loved your father .
The residue of your fortune Go to my cave and tell me. , Good old man , Thou art right welcome as thy master is .
Support him by the arm .
Give me your hand , And let me all your fortunes understand .
Not see him since ?
Sir , sir , that can not be .
But were I not the better part made mercy , I should not seek an absent argument Of my revenge , thou present .
But look to it : Find out thy brother , wheresoe'er he is .
Bring him , dead or living , Within this twelvemonth or turn thou no more To seek a living in our territory .
Thy lands and all things that thou dost call thine Worth seizure , do we seize into our hands Till thou canst quit thee by thy brother's mouth Of what we think against thee .
Oh , that your Highness knew my heart in this : I never loved my brother in my life .
More villain thou. , Well , push him out of doors And let my officers of such a nature Make an extent upon his house and lands .
Do this expediently , and turn him going .
Hang there , my verse , in witness of my love .
And how like you this shepherd's life , Master Touchstone ?
Truly , shepherd , in respect of itself , it is a good life ; but in respect that it is a shepherd's life , it is naught .
In respect that it is solitary , I like it very well ; but in respect that it is private , it is a very vile life .
Now in respect it is in the fields , it pleaseth me well ; but in respect it is not in the court , it is tedious .
Hast any philosophy in thee , shepherd ?
Such a one is a natural philosopher .
Wast ever in court , shepherd ?
No , truly .
Then thou art damned .
Nay , I hope .
Your reason .
Why , if thou never wast at court , thou never saw'st good manners ; if thou never saw'st good manners , then thy manners must be wicked , and wickedness is sin , and sin is damnation .
Thou art in a parlous state , shepherd .
Not a whit , Touchstone .
Those that are good manners at the court are as ridiculous in the country as the behavior of the country is most mockable at the court .
You told me you salute not at the court but you kiss your hands .
That courtesy would be uncleanly if courtiers were shepherds .
Instance , briefly .
Come , instance .
Why , we are still handling our ewes , and their fells , you know , are greasy .
Why , do not your courtier's hands sweat ?
And is not the grease of a mutton as wholesome as the sweat of a man ?
A better instance , I say .
Come .
Besides , our hands are hard .
Your lips will feel them the sooner .
Come .
Most shallow man .
Thou worms ' meat in respect of a good piece of flesh , indeed .
Learn of the wise and perpend : civet is of a baser birth than tar , the very uncleanly flux of a cat .
Mend the instance , shepherd .
You have too courtly a wit for me .
I'll rest .
Good morrow to your Worship .
Can you tell if Rosalind , the duke's daughter , be banished with her father ?
Where will the old duke live ?
Wilt thou rest damned ?
God help thee , shallow man .
God make incision in thee ; thou art raw .
That is another simple sin in you , to bring the ewes and the rams together and to offer to get your living by the copulation of cattle ; to be bawd to a bellwether and to betray a she-lamb of a twelvemonth to a crooked-pated old cuckoldly ram , out of all reasonable match .
Here comes young Master Ganymede , my new mistress's brother .
No jewel is like Rosalind .
Her worth being mounted on the wind , Through all the world bears Rosalind .
All the pictures fairest lined Are but black to Rosalind .
Let no fair be kept in mind But the fair of Rosalind .
I'll rhyme you so eight years together , dinners and suppers and sleeping hours excepted .
It is the right butter-women's rank to market .
Out , fool .
For a taste : If a hart do lack a hind , Let him seek out Rosalind .
If the cat will after kind , So , be sure , will Rosalind .
Winter garments must be lined , So must slender Rosalind .
They that reap must sheaf and bind , Then to cart with Rosalind .
Sweetest nut hath sourest rind ; Such a nut is Rosalind .
He that sweetest rose will find Must find love's prick , and Rosalind .
This is the very false gallop of verses .
Why do you infect yourself with them ?
Peace , you dull fool .
I found them on a tree .
Truly , the tree yields bad fruit .
You have said , but whether wisely or no , let the forest judge .
Peace .
But upon the fairest boughs , Or at every sentence end , Will I "Rosalinda" write , Teaching all that read to know The quintessence of every sprite Heaven would in little show .
Therefore heaven nature charged That one body should be filled With all graces wide-enlarged .
Nature presently distilled Helen's cheek , but not her heart , Cleopatra's majesty , Atalanta's better part , Sad Lucretia's modesty .
Thus Rosalind of many parts By heavenly synod was devised , Of many faces , eyes , and hearts To have the touches dearest prized .
Heaven would that she these gifts should have And I to live and die her slave .
Didst thou hear these verses ?
Oh , yes , I heard them all , and more too , for some of them had in them more feet than the verses would bear .
Ay , but the feet were lame and could not bear themselves without the verse , and therefore stood lamely in the verse .
But didst thou hear without wondering how thy name should be hanged and carved upon these trees ?
Is it a man ?
And a chain , that you once wore , about his neck .
Change you color ?
I prithee , who ?
O Lord , Lord , it is a hard matter for friends to meet , but mountains may be removed with earthquakes and so encounter .
Nay , but who is it ?
Is it possible ?
Nay , I prithee now , with most petitionary vehemence , tell me who it is .
O wonderful , wonderful , and most wonderful wonderful , and yet again wonderful , and after that , out of all whooping !
Good my complexion , dost thou think though I am caparisoned like a man , I have a doublet and hose in my disposition ?
One inch of delay more is a South Sea of discovery .
I prithee , tell me who is it quickly , and speak apace .
I would thou couldst stammer , that thou might'st pour this concealed man out of thy mouth as wine comes out of a narrow-mouthed bottle , either too much at once , or none at all .
I prithee take the cork out of thy mouth , that I may drink thy tidings .
So you may put a man in your belly .
Is he of God's making ?
What manner of man ?
Is his head worth a hat or his chin worth a beard ?
Nay , he hath but a little beard .
Why , God will send more , if the man will be thankful .
Let me stay the growth of his beard , if thou delay me not the knowledge of his chin .
It is young Orlando , that tripped up the wrestler's heels and your heart both in an instant .
Nay , but the devil take mocking .
I ' faith , coz , 'tis he .
Orlando ?
Orlando .
What did he when thou saw'st him ?
What said he ?
How looked he ?
Wherein went he ?
What makes him here ?
Did he ask for me ?
Where remains he ?
How parted he with thee ?
And when shalt thou see him again ?
Answer me in one word .
But doth he know that I am in this forest and in man's apparel ?
Looks he as freshly as he did the day he wrestled ?
But take a taste of my finding him , and relish it with good observance .
I found him under a tree like a dropped acorn .
It may well be called Jove's tree when it drops forth such fruit .
Give me audience , good madam .
Proceed .
There lay he , stretched along like a wounded knight .
Though it be pity to see such a sight , it well becomes the ground .
Cry "holla" to thy tongue , I prithee .
It curvets unseasonably .
He was furnished like a hunter .
Oh , ominous !
He comes to kill my heart .
I would sing my song without a burden .
Thou bring'st me out of tune .
Do you not know I am a woman ?
When I think , I must speak .
Sweet , say on .
You bring me out .
Soft , comes he not here ?
Tis he .
I thank you for your company , but , good faith , I had as lief have been myself alone .
And so had I , but yet , for fashion sake , I thank you too for your society .
God be wi ' you .
Let's meet as little as we can .
I do desire we may be better strangers .
I pray you mar no more trees with writing love songs in their barks .
I pray you mar no more of my verses with reading them ill- favoredly .
Rosalind is your love's name ?
Yes , just .
I do not like her name .
What stature is she of ?
Just as high as my heart .
You are full of pretty answers .
The worst fault you have is to be in love .
Tis a fault I will not change for your best virtue .
I am weary of you .
There I shall see mine own figure .
Which I take to be either a fool or a cipher .
I'll tarry no longer with you .
Farewell , good Signior Love .
I am glad of your departure .
Adieu , good Monsieur Melancholy .
Very well .
What would you ?
You should ask me what time o ' day .
There's no clock in the forest .
Then there is no true lover in the forest , else sighing every minute and groaning every hour would detect the lazy foot of time as well as a clock .
Marry , do I , sir , and I came to acquaint you with a matter .
I am given , sir , secretly to understand that your younger brother Orlando hath a disposition to come in disguised against me to try a fall .
Tomorrow , sir , I wrestle for my credit , and he that escapes me without some broken limb shall acquit him well .
Your brother is but young and tender , and , for your love I would be loath to foil him , as I must for my own honor if he come in .
Therefore , out of my love to you , I came hither to acquaint you withal , that either you might stay him from his intendment or brook such disgrace well as he shall run into , in that it is a thing of his own search and altogether against my will .
Charles , I thank thee for thy love to me , which thou shalt find I will most kindly requite .
I had myself notice of my brother's purpose herein and have by underhand means labored to dissuade him from it ; but he is resolute .
I'll tell thee , Charles : it is the stubbornest young fellow of France , full of ambition , an envious emulator of every man's good parts , a secret and villainous contriver against me his natural brother .
Therefore use thy discretion .
I had as lief thou didst break his neck as his finger .
I speak but brotherly of him , but should I anatomize him to thee as he is , I must blush and weep , and thou must look pale and wonder .
And why not the swift foot of time ?
Had not that been as proper ?
By no means , sir .
Time travels in diverse paces with diverse persons .
I'll tell you who time ambles withal , who time trots withal , who time gallops withal , and who he stands still withal .
I prithee , who doth he trot withal ?
Who ambles time withal ?
These time ambles withal .
Who doth he gallop withal ?
Who stays it still withal ?
With lawyers in the vacation , for they sleep between term and term , and then they perceive not how time moves .
Where dwell you , pretty youth ?
Are you native of this place ?
As the cony that you see dwell where she is kindled .
Your accent is something finer than you could purchase in so removed a dwelling .
I have been told so of many .
But indeed an old religious uncle of mine taught me to speak , who was in his youth an inland man , one that knew courtship too well , for there he fell in love .
I have heard him read many lectures against it , and I thank God I am not a woman , to be touched with so many giddy offenses as he hath generally taxed their whole sex withal .
Can you remember any of the principal evils that he laid to the charge of women ?
There were none principal .
I prithee , recount some of them .
No , I will not cast away my physic but on those that are sick .
There is a man haunts the forest that abuses our young plants with carving "Rosalind" on their barks , hangs odes upon hawthorns and elegies on brambles , all , forsooth , deifying the name of Rosalind .
I am he that is so love-shaked .
I pray you tell me your remedy .
There is none of my uncle's marks upon you .
He taught me how to know a man in love , in which cage of rushes I am sure you are not prisoner .
What were his marks ?
A lean cheek , which you have not ; a blue eye and sunken , which you have not ; an unquestionable spirit , which you have not ; a beard neglected , which you have not , but I pardon you for that , for simply your having in beard is a younger brother's revenue .
Then your hose should be ungartered , your bonnet unbanded , your sleeve unbuttoned , your shoe untied , and everything about you demonstrating a careless desolation .
But you are no such man .
You are rather point-device in your accouterments , as loving yourself than seeming the lover of any other .
Fair youth , I would I could make thee believe I love .
Me believe it ?
But , in good sooth , are you he that hangs the verses on the trees wherein Rosalind is so admired ?
I swear to thee , youth , by the white hand of Rosalind , I am that he , that unfortunate he .
But are you so much in love as your rhymes speak ?
Neither rhyme nor reason can express how much .
Love is merely a madness and , I tell you , deserves as well a dark house and a whip as madmen do , and the reason why they are not so punished and cured is that the lunacy is so ordinary that the whippers are in love , too .
Yet I profess curing it by counsel .
Did you ever cure any so ?
Yes , one , and in this manner .
I would not be cured , youth .
I would cure you if you would but call me Rosalind and come every day to my cote and woo me .
Now , by the faith of my love , I will .
Tell me where it is .
Go with me to it , and I'll show it you ; and by the way you shall tell me where in the forest you live .
Will you go ?
With all my heart , good youth .
Nay , you must call me Rosalind. , Come , sister , will you go ?
Come apace , good Audrey .
I will fetch up your goats , Audrey .
Doth my simple feature content you ?
Your features , Lord warrant us !
What features ?
Truly , I would the gods had made thee poetical .
I do not know what "poetical" is .
Is it honest in deed and word ?
Is it a true thing ?
No , truly , for the truest poetry is the most feigning , and lovers are given to poetry , and what they swear in poetry may be said as lovers they do feign .
Do you wish then that the gods had made me poetical ?
I do , truly , for thou swear'st to me thou art honest .
Now , if thou wert a poet , I might have some hope thou didst feign .
Would you not have me honest ?
No , truly , unless thou wert hard-favored , for honesty coupled to beauty is to have honey a sauce to sugar .
Well , I am not fair , and therefore I pray the gods make me honest .
I am not a slut , though I thank the gods I am foul .
Well , praised be the gods for thy foulness ; sluttishness may come hereafter .
But what though ?
Courage .
Well , that is the dowry of his wife ; 'tis none of his own getting .
Horns ?
Even so .
Poor men alone ?
No , no .
The noblest deer hath them as huge as the rascal .
Is the single man therefore blessed ?
No .
As a walled town is more worthier than a village , so is the forehead of a married man more honorable than the bare brow of a bachelor .
Here comes Sir Oliver. , Sir Oliver Martext , you are well met .
Will you dispatch us here under this tree , or shall we go with you to your chapel ?
Is there none here to give the woman ?
I will not take her on gift of any man .
Truly , she must be given , or the marriage is not lawful .
How do you , sir ?
You are very well met .
God 'ild you for your last company .
I am very glad to see you .
Even a toy in hand here , sir .
Nay , pray be covered .
Will you be married , motley ?
As the ox hath his bow , sir , the horse his curb , and the falcon her bells , so man hath his desires ; and as pigeons bill , so wedlock would be nibbling .
And will you , being a man of your breeding , be married under a bush like a beggar ?
Get you to church , and have a good priest that can tell you what marriage is .
Then one of you will prove a shrunk panel and , like green timber , warp , warp .
Go thou with me , and let me counsel thee .
Come , sweet Audrey .
We must be married , or we must live in bawdry. , Farewell , good Master Oliver , not 'T is no matter .
Ne'er a fantastical knave of them all shall flout me out of my calling .
Never talk to me .
I will weep .
Do , I prithee , but yet have the grace to consider that tears do not become a man .
But have I not cause to weep ?
As good cause as one would desire .
Therefore weep .
And his kissing is as full of sanctity as the touch of holy bread .
I am heartily glad I came hither to you .
If he come tomorrow , I'll give him his payment .
If ever he go alone again , I'll never wrestle for prize more .
Farewell , good Charles .
But it shall not be so long ; this wrestler shall clear all .
You have heard him swear downright he was .
He attends here in the forest on the duke your father .
I met the duke yesterday and had much question with him .
So he laughed and let me go .
But what talk we of fathers when there is such a man as Orlando ?
Oh , that's a brave man .
Who comes here ?
Mistress and master , you have oft inquired After the shepherd that complained of love , Who you saw sitting by me on the turf , Praising the proud disdainful shepherdess That was his mistress .
The sight of lovers feedeth those in love .
Sweet Phoebe , do not scorn me .
Do not , Phoebe .
Say that you love me not , but say not so In bitterness .
Now counterfeit to swoon , why , now fall down ; Or if thou canst not , Oh , for shame , for shame , Lie not , to say mine eyes are murderers .
Now show the wound mine eye hath made in thee .
But now mine eyes , Which I have darted at thee , hurt thee not .
Nor , I am sure , there is no force in eyes That can do hurt .
O dear Phoebe , If ever , as that ever may be near , You meet in some fresh cheek the power of fancy , Then shall you know the wounds invisible That love's keen arrows make .
But till that time Come not thou near me .
And when that time comes , Afflict me with thy mocks , pity me not , As till that time I shall not pity thee .
But , mistress , know yourself .
Down on your knees And thank heaven , fasting , for a good man's love , For I must tell you friendly in your ear , Sell when you can ; you are not for all markets .
Cry the man mercy , love him , take his offer .
So take her to thee , shepherd .
Besides , I like you not .
Will you go , sister ? , Shepherd , ply her hard .
Come , sister. , Shepherdess , look on him better , And be not proud .
Though all the world could see , None could be so abused in sight as he .
Sweet Phoebe , pity me .
Why , I am sorry for thee , gentle Silvius .
If you do sorrow at my grief in love , By giving love your sorrow and my grief Were both extermined .
Thou hast my love .
Is not that neighborly ?
I would have you .
Why , that were covetousness .
But do not look for further recompense Than thine own gladness that thou art employed .
Know'st thou the youth that spoke to me erewhile ?
Not very well , but I have met him oft , And he hath bought the cottage and the bounds That the old carlot once was master of .
Think not I love him , though I ask for him .
Tis but a peevish boy , yet he talks well , But what care I for words ?
Yet words do well When he that speaks them pleases those that hear .
It is a pretty youth , not very pretty , But sure he's proud , and yet his pride becomes him .
He'll make a proper man .
He is not very tall , yet for his years he's tall .
His leg is but so-so , and yet 'tis well .
There was a pretty redness in his lip , A little riper and more lusty red Than that mixed in his cheek : 'twas just the difference Betwixt the constant red and mingled damask .
For what had he to do to chide at me ?
He said mine eyes were black and my hair black And , now I am remembered , scorned at me .
I marvel why I answered not again .
But that's all one : omittance is no quittance .
I'll write to him a very taunting letter , And thou shalt bear it .
Wilt thou , Silvius ?
Phoebe , with all my heart .
I will be bitter with him and passing short .
Go with me , Silvius .
I prithee , pretty youth , let me be better acquainted with thee .
They say you are a melancholy fellow .
I am so .
I do love it better than laughing .
Those that are in extremity of either are abominable fellows and betray themselves to every modern censure worse than drunkards .
Why , 'tis good to be sad and say nothing .
Why then , 'tis good to be a post .
I have neither the scholar's melancholy , which is emulation ; nor the musician's , which is fantastical ; nor the courtier's , which is proud ; nor the soldier's , which is ambitious ; nor the lawyer's , which is politic ; nor the lady's , which is nice ; nor the lover's , which is all these , but it is a melancholy of mine own , compounded of many simples , extracted from many objects , and indeed the sundry contemplation of my travels , in which my often rumination wraps me in a most humorous sadness .
A traveler .
By my faith , you have great reason to be sad .
I fear you have sold your own lands to see other men's .
Then to have seen much and to have nothing is to have rich eyes and poor hands .
Yes , I have gained my experience .
And your experience makes you sad .
I had rather have a fool to make me merry than experience to make me sad , and to travel for it , too .
Good day and happiness , dear Rosalind .
My fair Rosalind , I come within an hour of my promise .
I pray thee , Rosalind , sweet my coz , be merry .
Dear Celia , I show more mirth than I am mistress of , and would you yet I were merrier ?
Unless you could teach me to forget a banished father , you must not learn me how to remember any extraordinary pleasure .
Herein I see thou lov'st me not with the full weight that I love thee .
Well , I will forget the condition of my estate to rejoice in yours .
By mine honor I will , and when I break that oath , let me turn monster .
Therefore , my sweet Rose , my dear Rose , be merry .
From henceforth I will , coz , and devise sports .
Let me see , what think you of falling in love ?
Break an hour's promise in love ?
Pardon me , dear Rosalind .
Nay , an you be so tardy , come no more in my sight .
I had as lief be wooed of a snail .
Of a snail ?
Besides , he brings his destiny with him .
What's that ?
Why , horns , which such as you are fain to be beholding to your wives for .
But he comes armed in his fortune and prevents the slander of his wife .
Virtue is no hornmaker , and my Rosalind is virtuous .
And I am your Rosalind .
Rosalind of a better leer than you .
Come , woo me , woo me , for now I am in a holiday humor , and like enough to consent .
What would you say to me now , an I were your very , very Rosalind ?
I would kiss before I spoke .
Nay , you were better speak first , and when you were graveled for lack of matter , you might take occasion to kiss .
Very good orators , when they are out , they will spit ; and for lovers lacking , God warn us , matter , the cleanliest shift is to kiss .
How if the kiss be denied ?
Who could be out , being before his beloved mistress ?
Marry , that should you if I were your mistress , or I should think my honesty ranker than my wit .
Am not I your Rosalind ?
I take some joy to say you are because I would be talking of her .
No , faith , die by attorney .
The poor world is almost six thousand years old , and in all this time there was not any man died in his own person , videlicet , in a love cause .
Then love me , Rosalind .
Yes , faith , will I , Fridays and Saturdays and all .
And wilt thou have me ?
Ay , and twenty such .
What sayest thou ?
Are you not good ?
I hope so .
Why then , can one desire too much of a good thing ? , Come , sister , you shall be the priest and marry us. , Give me your hand , Orlando. , What do you say , sister ?
Pray thee , marry us .
I will .
Ay , but when ?
Why , now , as fast as she can marry us .
Then you must say "I take thee , Rosalind , for wife." I take thee , Rosalind , for wife .
I might ask you for your commission , but I do take thee , Orlando , for my husband .
So do all thoughts .
They are winged .
Now tell me how long you would have her after you have possessed her .
Forever and a day .
Say "a day" without the "ever." No , no , Orlando , men are April when they woo , December when they wed. Maids are May when they are maids , but the sky changes when they are wives .
I will be more jealous of thee than a Barbary cock- pigeon over his hen , more clamorous than a parrot against rain , more newfangled than an ape , more giddy in my desires than a monkey .
I will weep for nothing , like Diana in the fountain , and I will do that when you are disposed to be merry .
I will laugh like a hyena , and that when thou art inclined to sleep .
But will my Rosalind do so ?
Oh , but she is wise .
Or else she could not have the wit to do this .
The wiser , the waywarder .
Make the doors upon a woman's wit , and it will out at the casement .
Shut that , and 'twill out at the keyhole .
Stop that , 'twill fly with the smoke out at the chimney .
A man that had a wife with such a wit , he might say "Wit , whither wilt ? " Nay , you might keep that check for it , till you met your wife's wit going to your neighbor's bed .
You shall never take her without her answer unless you take her without her tongue .
Oh , that woman that can not make her fault her husband's occasion , let her never nurse her child herself , for she will breed it like a fool .
For these two hours , Rosalind , I will leave thee .
I must attend the duke at dinner .
By two o'clock I will be with thee again .
Ay , go your ways , go your ways .
I knew what you would prove .
My friends told me as much , and I thought no less .
Tis but one cast away , and so , come , death .
Two o'clock is your hour ?
Ay , sweet Rosalind .
Therefore beware my censure , and keep your promise .
With no less religion than if thou wert indeed my Rosalind .
So , adieu .
Well , time is the old justice that examines all such offenders , and let time try .
Adieu .
You have simply misused our sex in your love-prate .
We must have your doublet and hose plucked over your head and show the world what the bird hath done to her own nest .
O coz , coz , coz , my pretty little coz , that thou didst know how many fathom deep I am in love .
Or rather bottomless , that as fast as you pour affection in , it runs out .
No , that same wicked bastard of Venus that was begot of thought , conceived of spleen , and born of madness , that blind rascally boy that abuses everyone's eyes because his own are out , let him be judge how deep I am in love .
I'll tell thee , Aliena , I can not be out of the sight of Orlando .
I'll go find a shadow and sigh till he come .
And I'll sleep .
Which is he that killed the deer ?
Yes , sir .
Sing it .
Tis no matter how it be in tune , so it make noise enough .
How say you now ?
Is it not past two o'clock ?
And here much Orlando .
Look who comes here .
No , I protest , I know not the contents .
Phoebe did write it .
What shall be our sport , then ?
Let us sit and mock the good housewife Fortune from her wheel , that her gifts may henceforth be bestowed equally .
No ?
When Nature hath made a fair creature , may she not by Fortune fall into the fire ?
Though Nature hath given us wit to flout at Fortune , hath not Fortune sent in this fool to cut off the argument ?
Come , come , you are a fool , And turned into the extremity of love .
I say she never did invent this letter .
This is a man's invention , and his hand .
Sure it is hers .
Why , she defies me Like Turk to Christian .
Women's gentle brain Could not drop forth such giant-rude invention , Such Ethiop words , blacker in their effect Than in their countenance .
Will you hear the letter ?
So please you , for I never heard it yet , Yet heard too much of Phoebe's cruelty .
She Phoebes me .
Mark how the tyrant writes .
That a maiden's heart hath burned ?
Call you this railing ?
Why , thy godhead laid apart , Warr'st thou with a woman's heart ?
Not to be endured .
It is no boast , being asked , to say we are .
Orlando doth commend him to you both , And to that youth he calls his Rosalind He sends this bloody napkin .
Are you he ?
Some of my shame , if you will know of me What man I am , and how , and why , and where This handkercher was stained .
I pray you , tell it .
He threw his eye aside , And mark what object did present itself : Under an old oak , whose boughs were mossed with age And high top bald with dry antiquity , A wretched , ragged man , o'ergrown with hair , Lay sleeping on his back .
This seen , Orlando did approach the man And found it was his brother , his elder brother .
Oh , I have heard him speak of that same brother , And he did render him the most unnatural That lived amongst men .
But to Orlando : did he leave him there , Food to the sucked and hungry lioness ?
Twice did he turn his back and purposed so , But kindness , nobler ever than revenge , And nature , stronger than his just occasion , Made him give battle to the lioness , Who quickly fell before him ; in which hurtling , From miserable slumber I awaked .
Are you his brother ?
Was 't you he rescued ?
Was 't you that did so oft contrive to kill him ?
Twas I , but 'tis not I. I do not shame To tell you what I was , since my conversion So sweetly tastes , being the thing I am .
But for the bloody napkin ?
By and by .
Brief , I recovered him , bound up his wound , And after some small space , being strong at heart ,
Many will swoon when they do look on blood .
There is more in it. , Cousin Ganymede .
Look , he recovers .
I would I were at home .
We'll lead you thither .
I pray you , will you take him by the arm ?
Be of good cheer , youth .
You a man ?
You lack a man's heart .
I do so , I confess it .
Ah , sirrah , a body would think this was well-counterfeited .
I pray you tell your brother how well I counterfeited .
Heigh-ho .
This was not counterfeit .
There is too great testimony in your complexion that it was a passion of earnest .
Counterfeit , I assure you .
Well then , take a good heart and counterfeit to be a man .
So I do .
But i ' faith , I should have been a woman by right .
Come , you look paler and paler .
That will I , for I must bear answer back How you excuse my brother , Rosalind .
I shall devise something .
But I pray you commend my counterfeiting to him .
Will you go ?
We shall find a time , Audrey .
Patience , gentle Audrey .
Faith , the priest was good enough , for all the old gentleman's saying .
A most wicked Sir Oliver , Audrey , a most vile Martext .
But , Audrey , there is a youth here in the forest lays claim to you .
Here comes the man you mean .
It is meat and drink to me to see a clown .
How old are you , friend ?
Five-and-twenty , sir .
A ripe age .
Is thy name William ?
William , sir .
A fair name .
Wast born i ' th ' forest here ?
Ay , sir , I thank God .
Thank God." A good answer .
Art rich ?
Faith , sir , so-so .
So-so" is good , very good , very excellent good .
And yet it is not : it is but so-so .
Art thou wise ?
Ay , sir , I have a pretty wit .
Why , thou sayst well .
Give me your hand .
Art thou learned ?
No , sir .
Then learn this of me : to have is to have .
For it is a figure in rhetoric that drink , being poured out of a cup into a glass , by filling the one doth empty the other .
He , sir , that must marry this woman .
Therefore , you clown , abandon , which is , in the vulgar , "leave" , the society , which in the boorish is "company" , of this female , which in the common is "woman" ; which together is , abandon the society of this female , or , clown , thou perishest ; or , to thy better understanding , diest ; or , to wit , I kill thee , make thee away , translate thy life into death , thy liberty into bondage .
I will deal in poison with thee , or in bastinado , or in steel .
I will bandy with thee in faction .
I will kill thee a hundred and fifty ways .
Therefore tremble and depart .
Do , good William .
God rest you merry , sir .
Our master and mistress seeks you .
Come away , away .
Trip , Audrey , trip , Audrey. , I attend , I attend .
Mistress , you must come away to your father .
Were you made the messenger ?
Of a certain knight that swore by his honor they were good pancakes , and swore by his honor the mustard was naught .
Now , I'll stand to it , the pancakes were naught and the mustard was good , and yet was not the knight forsworn .
How prove you that in the great heap of your knowledge ?
Ay , marry , now unmuzzle your wisdom .
Stand you both forth now : stroke your chins and swear by your beards that I am a knave .
By our beards ( if we had them ) , thou art .
By my knavery ( if I had it ) , then I were .
Is 't possible that on so little acquaintance you should like her ?
It shall be to your good , for my father's house and all the revenue that was old Sir Rowland's will I estate upon you , and here live and die a shepherd .
You have my consent .
Let your wedding be tomorrow .
Thither will I invite the duke and all's contented followers .
Go you and prepare Aliena , for look you , here comes my Rosalind .
And you , fair sister .
O my dear Orlando , how it grieves me to see thee wear thy heart in a scarf .
It is my arm .
I thought thy heart had been wounded with the claws of a lion .
They are in the very wrath of love , and they will together .
Clubs can not part them .
They shall be married tomorrow , and I will bid the duke to the nuptial .
But Oh , how bitter a thing it is to look into happiness through another man's eyes .
By so much the more shall I tomorrow be at the height of heart-heaviness , by how much I shall think my brother happy in having what he wishes for .
Why , then , tomorrow I can not serve your turn for Rosalind ?
I can live no longer by thinking .
I will weary you then no longer with idle talking .
I speak not this that you should bear a good opinion of my knowledge , insomuch I say I know you are .
Believe then , if you please , that I can do strange things .
I have , since I was three year old , conversed with a magician , most profound in his art and yet not damnable .
If you do love Rosalind so near the heart as your gesture cries it out , when your brother marries Aliena shall you marry her .
I know into what straits of fortune she is driven , and it is not impossible to me , if it appear not inconvenient to you , to set her before your eyes tomorrow , human as she is , and without any danger .
Speak'st thou in sober meanings ?
By my life I do , which I tender dearly , though I say I am a magician .
Look , here comes a lover of mine and a lover of hers .
I care not if I have .
You are there followed by a faithful shepherd .
Good shepherd , tell this youth what 'tis to love .
It is to be all made of sighs and tears , And so am I for Phoebe .
And I for Ganymede .
And I for Rosalind .
And I for no woman .
It is to be all made of faith and service , And so am I for Phoebe .
And I for Ganymede .
And I for Rosalind .
And I for no woman .
It is to be all made of fantasy , All made of passion and all made of wishes , All adoration , duty , and observance , All humbleness , all patience and impatience , All purity , all trial , all observance , And so am I for Phoebe .
And so am I for Rosalind .
And so am I for no woman .
If this be so , why blame you me to love you ?
If this be so , why blame you me to love you ?
If this be so , why blame you me to love you ?
Why do you speak , too , "Why blame you me to love you ? " ?
To her that is not here , nor doth not hear .
Pray you , no more of this .
Tis like the howling of Irish wolves against the moon .
I'll not fail , if I live .
Nor I .
Nor I .
Tomorrow is the joyful day , Audrey .
Tomorrow will we be married .
I do desire it with all my heart , and I hope it is no dishonest desire to desire to be a woman of the world .
Here comes two of the banished duke's pages .
Well met , honest gentleman .
By my troth , well met .
Come , sit , sit , and a song .
We are for you .
Sit i ' th ' middle .
Shall we clap into 't roundly , without hawking or spitting or saying we are hoarse , which are the only prologues to a bad voice ?
I ' faith , i ' faith , and both in a tune like two gypsies on a horse .
Truly , young gentlemen , though there was no great matter in the ditty , yet the note was very untunable .
Dost thou believe , Orlando , that the boy Can do all this that he hath promised ?
That would I , had I kingdoms to give with her .
That would I , were I of all kingdoms king .
That will I , should I die the hour after .
But if you do refuse to marry me , You'll give yourself to this most faithful shepherd ?
So is the bargain .
Though to have her and death were both one thing .
I have promised to make all this matter even .
Keep your word , Phoebe , that you'll marry me Or else , refusing me , to wed this shepherd .
Keep your word , Silvius , that you'll marry her If she refuse me .
And from hence I go To make these doubts all even .
I do remember in this shepherd boy Some lively touches of my daughter's favor .
My lord , the first time that I ever saw him Methought he was a brother to your daughter .
But , my good lord , this boy is forest-born And hath been tutored in the rudiments Of many desperate studies by his uncle , Whom he reports to be a great magician Obscured in the circle of this forest .
Good my lord , bid him welcome .
This is the motley-minded gentleman that I have so often met in the forest .
He hath been a courtier , he swears .
If any man doubt that , let him put me to my purgation .
I have undone three tailors .
I have had four quarrels , and like to have fought one .
And how was that ta'en up ?
Faith , we met and found the quarrel was upon the seventh cause .
How "seventh cause" ? , Good my lord , like this fellow .
I like him very well .
Prithee , who is 't that thou mean'st ?
One that old Frederick , your father , loves .
My father's love is enough to honor him .
Enough .
Speak no more of him ; you'll be whipped for taxation one of these days .
The more pity that fools may not speak wisely what wise men do foolishly .
With his mouth full of news .
Which he will put on us as pigeons feed their young .
Then shall we be news-crammed .
All the better .
We shall be the more marketable. , Bonjour , Monsieur Le Beau .
What's the news ?
Fair princess , you have lost much good sport .
Sport ?
Of what color ?
God 'ild you , sir .
A poor virgin , sir , an ill-favored thing , sir , but mine own .
By my faith , he is very swift and sententious .
But for the seventh cause .
How did you find the quarrel on the seventh cause ?
Upon a lie seven times removed. , Bear your body more seeming , Audrey. , As thus , sir : I did dislike the cut of a certain courtier's beard .
He sent me word if I said his beard was not cut well , he was in the mind it was .
This is called "the countercheck quarrelsome , " and so to "the lie circumstantial" and "the lie direct." And how oft did you say his beard was not well cut ?
He's as good at anything and yet a fool .
He uses his folly like a stalking-horse , and under the presentation of that he shoots his wit .
Then is there mirth in heaven When earthly things , made even , Atone together .
Good duke , receive thy daughter .
Hymen from heaven brought her , Yea , brought her hither , That thou mightst join her hand with his Whose heart within his bosom is .
If there be truth in sight , you are my daughter .
If there be truth in sight , you are my Rosalind .
If sight and shape be true , Why then , my love adieu .
Peace , ho !
O my dear niece , welcome thou art to me , Even daughter , welcome in no less degree .
Let me have audience for a word or two .
I am the second son of old Sir Rowland , That bring these tidings to this fair assembly .
Duke Frederick , hearing how that every day Men of great worth resorted to this forest , Addressed a mighty power , which were on foot In his own conduct , purposely to take His brother here and put him to the sword .
This to be true I do engage my life .
Sir , by your patience : if I heard you rightly , The duke hath put on a religious life And thrown into neglect the pompous court .
He hath .
To him will I .
Out of these convertites There is much matter to be heard and learned .
Stay , Jaques , stay .
To see no pastime I .
What you would have I'll stay to know at your abandoned cave .
Proceed , proceed .
We'll so begin these rites As we do trust they'll end , in true delights .
If it be true that good wine needs no bush , 'tis true that a good play needs no epilogue .
What color , madam ?
How shall I answer you ?
As wit and fortune will .
You tell us the manner of the wrestling .
Well , the beginning that is dead and buried .
There comes an old man and his three sons , I could match this beginning with an old tale .
Three proper young men of excellent growth and presence .
With bills on their necks : "Be it known unto all men by these presents." The eldest of the three wrestled with Charles , the duke's wrestler , which Charles in a moment threw him and broke three of his ribs , that there is little hope of life in him .
So he served the second , and so the third .
Yonder they lie , the poor old man their father making such pitiful dole over them that all the beholders take his part with weeping .
Alas !
But what is the sport , monsieur , that the ladies have lost ?
Why , this that I speak of .
Or I , I promise thee .
But is there any else longs to see this broken music in his sides ?
Shall we see this wrestling , cousin ?
Yonder sure they are coming .
Let us now stay and see it .
Come on .
Since the youth will not be entreated , his own peril on his forwardness .
Is yonder the man ?
Even he , madam .
Alas , he is too young .
Yet he looks successfully .
How now , daughter and cousin ?
Are you crept hither to see the wrestling ?
Ay , my liege , so please you give us leave .
You will take little delight in it , I can tell you , there is such odds in the man .
In pity of the challenger's youth , I would fain dissuade him , but he will not be entreated .
Call him hither , good Monsieur Le Beau .
Yonder comes my master , your brother .
Go apart , Adam , and thou shalt hear how he will shake me up .
Monsieur the challenger , the Princess calls for you .
I attend them with all respect and duty .
Young man , have you challenged Charles the wrestler ?
No , fair princess .
He is the general challenger .
I come but in as others do , to try with him the strength of my youth .
Young gentleman , your spirits are too bold for your years .
You have seen cruel proof of this man's strength .
If you saw yourself with your eyes or knew yourself with your judgment , the fear of your adventure would counsel you to a more equal enterprise .
We pray you for your own sake to embrace your own safety and give over this attempt .
Do , young sir .
But let your fair eyes and gentle wishes go with me to my trial , wherein , if I be foiled , there is but one shamed that was never gracious ; if killed , but one dead that was willing to be so .
I shall do my friends no wrong , for I have none to lament me ; the world no injury , for in it I have nothing .
Only in the world I fill up a place which may be better supplied when I have made it empty .
The little strength that I have , I would it were with you .
And mine , to eke out hers .
Fare you well .
Pray heaven I be deceived in you .
Your heart's desires be with you .
You shall try but one fall .
No , I warrant your Grace you shall not entreat him to a second , that have so mightily persuaded him from a first .
I would I were invisible , to catch the strong fellow by the leg .
O excellent young man !
If I had a thunderbolt in mine eye , I can tell who should down .
No more , no more .
How dost thou , Charles ?
He can not speak , my lord .
Bear him away .
What is thy name , young man ?
Orlando , my liege , the youngest son of Sir Rowland de Boys .
I would thou hadst been son to some man else .
The world esteemed thy father honorable , But I did find him still mine enemy .
I would thou hadst told me of another father .
Were I my father , coz , would I do this ?
I am more proud to be Sir Rowland's son , His youngest son , and would not change that calling To be adopted heir to Frederick .
My father loved Sir Rowland as his soul , And all the world was of my father's mind .
Had I before known this young man his son , I should have given him tears unto entreaties Ere he should thus have ventured .
Gentle cousin , Let us go thank him and encourage him .
Shall we go , coz ?
Ay. , Fare you well , fair gentleman .
He calls us back .
Will you go , coz ?
Have with you .
Fare you well .
What passion hangs these weights upon my tongue ?
I can not speak to her , yet she urged conference .
Or Charles or something weaker masters thee .
Good sir , I do in friendship counsel you To leave this place .
Albeit you have deserved High commendation , true applause , and love , Yet such is now the duke's condition That he misconsters all that you have done .
The duke is humorous .
But I can tell you that of late this duke Hath ta'en displeasure 'gainst his gentle niece , Grounded upon no other argument But that the people praise her for her virtues And pity her for her good father's sake ; And , on my life , his malice 'gainst the lady Will suddenly break forth .
Sir , fare you well .
Hereafter , in a better world than this , I shall desire more love and knowledge of you .
I rest much bounden to you .
Fare you well .
Thus must I from the smoke into the smother , From tyrant duke unto a tyrant brother .
But heavenly Rosalind !
Why , Rosalind !
Not one to throw at a dog .
No , thy words are too precious to be cast away upon curs .
Throw some of them at me .
Then there were two cousins laid up , when the one should be lamed with reasons and the other mad without any .
But is all this for your father ?
No , some of it is for my child's father .
If we walk not in the trodden paths our very petticoats will catch them .
Hem them away .
I would try , if I could cry "hem" and have him .
Come , come , wrestle with thy affections .
Oh , they take the part of a better wrestler than myself .
Oh , a good wish upon you .
The duke my father loved his father dearly .
Doth it therefore ensue that you should love his son dearly ?
By this kind of chase I should hate him , for my father hated his father dearly .
Yet I hate not Orlando .
No , faith , hate him not , for my sake .
Why should I not ?
Doth he not deserve well ?
Let me love him for that , and do you love him because I do .
Look , here comes the duke .
With his eyes full of anger .
Mistress , dispatch you with your safest haste , And get you from our court .
Me , uncle ?
You , cousin .
Within these ten days if that thou beest found So near our public court as twenty miles , Thou diest for it .
I do beseech your Grace , Let me the knowledge of my fault bear with me .
If with myself I hold intelligence Or have acquaintance with mine own desires , If that I do not dream or be not frantic , As I do trust I am not , then , dear uncle , Never so much as in a thought unborn Did I offend your Highness .
Thus do all traitors .
If their purgation did consist in words , They are as innocent as grace itself .
Let it suffice thee that I trust thee not .
Thou art thy father's daughter .
There's enough .
So was I when your Highness took his dukedom .
So was I when your Highness banished him .
My father was no traitor .
Then , good my liege , mistake me not so much To think my poverty is treacherous .
Dear sovereign , hear me speak .
Ay , Celia , we stayed her for your sake .
I was too young that time to value her , But now I know her .
If she be a traitor , Why so am I .
Thou art a fool .
She robs thee of thy name , And thou wilt show more bright and seem more virtuous When she is gone .
Then open not thy lips .
Firm and irrevocable is my doom Which I have passed upon her .
She is banished .
Pronounce that sentence then on me , my liege .
I can not live out of her company .
You are a fool. , You , niece , provide yourself .
If you outstay the time , upon mine honor And in the greatness of my word , you die .
O my poor Rosalind , whither wilt thou go ?
Wilt thou change fathers ?
I will give thee mine .
I charge thee , be not thou more grieved than I am .
I have more cause .
Now , sir , what make you here ?
Nothing .
I am not taught to make anything .
What mar you then , sir ?
Marry , sir , be better employed , and be naught awhile .
Shall I keep your hogs and eat husks with them ?
Know you where you are , sir ?
O sir , very well : here in your orchard .
Know you before whom , sir ?
Ay , better than him I am before knows me .
I know you are my eldest brother , and in the gentle condition of blood you should so know me .
I have as much of my father in me as you , albeit , I confess , your coming before me is nearer to his reverence .
Thou hast not , cousin .
Prithee , be cheerful .
Know'st thou not the duke Hath banished me , his daughter ?
That he hath not .
No , hath not ?
Rosalind lacks then the love Which teacheth thee that thou and I am one .
Shall we be sundered ?
Shall we part , sweet girl ?
For , by this heaven , now at our sorrows pale , Say what thou canst , I'll go along with thee .
Why , whither shall we go ?
To seek my uncle in the Forest of Arden .
Alas , what danger will it be to us , Maids as we are , to travel forth so far ?
Beauty provoketh thieves sooner than gold .
I'll put myself in poor and mean attire And with a kind of umber smirch my face .
Were it not better , Because that I am more than common tall , That I did suit me all points like a man ?
A gallant curtal-axe upon my thigh , A boar-spear in my hand , and in my heart Lie there what hidden woman's fear there will , We'll have a swashing and a martial outside , As many other mannish cowards have That do outface it with their semblances .
What shall I call thee when thou art a man ?
I'll have no worse a name than Jove's own page , And therefore look you call me Ganymede .
But what will you be called ?
Would he not be a comfort to our travel ?
Leave me alone to woo him .
Let's away And get our jewels and our wealth together , Devise the fittest time and safest way To hide us from pursuit that will be made After my flight .
Now go we in content To liberty , and not to banishment .
Now , my co-mates and brothers in exile , Hath not old custom made this life more sweet Than that of painted pomp ?
Are not these woods More free from peril than the envious court ?
These are counselors That feelingly persuade me what I am." Sweet are the uses of adversity , Which , like the toad , ugly and venomous , Wears yet a precious jewel in his head .
And this our life , exempt from public haunt , Finds tongues in trees , books in the running brooks , Sermons in stones , and good in everything .
I would not change it .
Happy is your Grace , That can translate the stubbornness of fortune Into so quiet and so sweet a style .
Come , shall we go and kill us venison ?
And indeed , my lord , The wretched animal heaved forth such groans That their discharge did stretch his leathern coat Almost to bursting , and the big round tears Coursed one another down his innocent nose In piteous chase .
And did you leave him in this contemplation ?
We did , my lord , weeping and commenting Upon the sobbing deer .
Show me the place .
I love to cope him in these sullen fits , For then he's full of matter .
I'll bring you to him straight .
Can it be possible that no man saw them ?
It can not be .
Some villains of my court Are of consent and sufferance in this .
I can not hear of any that did see her .
The ladies , her attendants of her chamber Saw her abed , and in the morning early They found the bed untreasured of their mistress .
My lord , the roinish clown , at whom so oft Your Grace was wont to laugh , is also missing .
Send to his brother .
Fetch that gallant hither .
If he be absent , bring his brother to me .
I'll make him find him .
Do this suddenly , And let not search and inquisition quail To bring again these foolish runaways .
Who's there ?
Why , what make you here ?
Why are you virtuous ?
Why do people love you ?
And wherefore are you gentle , strong , and valiant ?
Why would you be so fond to overcome The bonny prizer of the humorous duke ?
Your praise is come too swiftly home before you .
Know you not , master , to some kind of men Their graces serve them but as enemies ?
Oh , what a world is this when what is comely Envenoms him that bears it !
Why , what's the matter ?
Within this roof The enemy of all your graces lives .
Your brother , no , no brother , yet the son , Yet not the son , I will not call him son , Of him I was about to call his father Hath heard your praises , and this night he means To burn the lodging where you use to lie , And you within it .
If he fail of that , He will have other means to cut you off .
I overheard him and his practices .
This is no place , this house is but a butchery .
Abhor it , fear it , do not enter it .
Why , whither , Adam , wouldst thou have me go ?
No matter whither , so you come not here .
What , wouldst thou have me go and beg my food , Or with a base and boist'rous sword enforce A thievish living on the common road ?
Yet this I will not do , do how I can .
I rather will subject me to the malice Of a diverted blood and bloody brother .
But do not so .
Let me be your servant .
Though I look old , yet I am strong and lusty , For in my youth I never did apply Hot and rebellious liquors in my blood Nor did not with unbashful forehead woo The means of weakness and debility .
Therefore my age is as a lusty winter , Frosty but kindly .
Let me go with you .
I'll do the service of a younger man In all your business and necessities .
O good old man , how well in thee appears The constant service of the antique world , When service sweat for duty , not for meed .
But come thy ways .
We'll go along together , And ere we have thy youthful wages spent , We'll light upon some settled low content .
Master , go on , and I will follow thee To the last gasp , with truth and loyalty .
From seventeen years till now almost fourscore Here lived I , but now live here no more .
At seventeen years , many their fortunes seek , But at fourscore , it is too late a week .
Yet fortune can not recompense me better Than to die well , and not my master's debtor .
O Jupiter , how weary are my spirits !
I care not for my spirits , if my legs were not weary .
I can not go no further .
For my part , I had rather bear with you than bear you .
Ay , now am I in Arden , the more fool I .
Ay , be so , good Touchstone .
Look you who comes here , a young man and an old in solemn talk .
Wilt thou lay hands on me , villain ?
I am no villain .
Wert thou not my brother , I would not take this hand from thy throat till this other had pulled out thy tongue for saying so .
Thou hast railed on thyself .
Sweet masters , be patient .
For your father's remembrance , be at accord .
Let me go , I say .
I will not till I please .
You shall hear me .
My father charged you in his will to give me good education .
You have trained me like a peasant , obscuring and hiding from me all gentlemanlike qualities .
The spirit of my father grows strong in me , and I will no longer endure it .
And what wilt thou do , beg when that is spent ?
Well , sir , get you in .
I will not long be troubled with you .
You shall have some part of your will .
I pray you leave me .
That is the way to make her scorn you still .
O Corin , that thou knew'st how I do love her !
I partly guess , for I have loved ere now .
No , Corin , being old , thou canst not guess , Though in thy youth thou wast as true a lover As ever sighed upon a midnight pillow .
But if thy love were ever like to mine , As sure I think did never man love so , How many actions most ridiculous Hast thou been drawn to by thy fantasy ?
Into a thousand that I have forgotten .
Oh , thou didst then ne'er love so heartily .
If thou rememb'rest not the slightest folly That ever love did make thee run into , Thou hast not loved .
Or if thou hast not sat as I do now , Wearying thy hearer in thy mistress's praise , Thou hast not loved .
Or if thou hast not broke from company Abruptly , as my passion now makes me , Thou hast not loved .
O Phoebe , Phoebe , Phoebe !
Alas , poor shepherd , searching of thy wound , I have by hard adventure found mine own .
And I mine .
I remember when I was in love I broke my sword upon a stone and bid him take that for coming a- night to Jane Smile .
And I remember the kissing of her batler , and the cow's dugs that her pretty chopped hands had milked .
And I remember the wooing of a peascod instead of her , from whom I took two cods and , giving her them again , said with weeping tears , "Wear these for my sake." We that are true lovers run into strange capers .
But as all is mortal in nature , so is all nature in love mortal in folly .
Thou speak'st wiser than thou art ware of .
Nay , I shall ne'er be ware of mine own wit till I break my shins against it .
Jove , Jove , this shepherd's passion Is much upon my fashion .
And mine , but it grows something stale with me .
I pray you , one of you question yond man , if he for gold will give us any food .
Peace , fool .
He's not thy kinsman .
Who calls ?
Your betters , sir .
I prithee , shepherd , if that love or gold Can in this desert place buy entertainment , Bring us where we may rest ourselves and feed .
Fair sir , I pity her And wish , for her sake more than for mine own , My fortunes were more able to relieve her .
But I am shepherd to another man And do not shear the fleeces that I graze .
Besides , his cote , his flocks , and bounds of feed Are now on sale , and at our sheepcote now , By reason of his absence , there is nothing That you will feed on .
What is he that shall buy his flock and pasture ?
That young swain that you saw here but erewhile , That little cares for buying anything .
I pray thee , if it stand with honesty , Buy thou the cottage , pasture , and the flock , And thou shalt have to pay for it of us .
And we will mend thy wages .
Assuredly the thing is to be sold .
Go with me .
If you like upon report The soil , the profit , and this kind of life , I will your very faithful feeder be And buy it with your gold right suddenly .
More , more , I prithee , more .
It will make you melancholy , Monsieur Jaques .
I thank it .
More , I prithee , more .
I can suck melancholy out of a song as a weasel sucks eggs .
More , I prithee , more .
My voice is ragged .
I know I can not please you .
Come , more , another stanzo .
Nay , I care not for their names .
Well then , if ever I thank any man , I'll thank you .
But that they call "compliment" is like th ' encounter of two dog- apes .
Well , I'll end the song. , Sirs , cover the while ; the duke will drink under this tree. , He hath been all this day to look you .
And I have been all this day to avoid him .
He is too disputable for my company .
I think of as many matters as he , but I give heaven thanks and make no boast of them .
Come , warble , come .
I'll give you a verse to this note that I made yesterday in despite of my invention .
Dear master , I can go no further .
Oh , I die for food .
Here lie I down and measure out my grave .
Farewell , kind master .
Why , how now , Adam ?
No greater heart in thee ?
Live a little , comfort a little , cheer thyself a little .
If this uncouth forest yield anything savage , I will either be food for it or bring it for food to thee .
Thy conceit is nearer death than thy powers .
I will here be with thee presently , and if I bring thee not something to eat , I will give thee leave to die .
But if thou diest before I come , thou art a mocker of my labor .
Well said .
Thou look'st cheerly , and I'll be with thee quickly .
Yet thou liest in the bleak air .
Cheerly , good Adam .
I think he be transformed into a beast , For I can nowhere find him like a man .
My lord , he is but even now gone hence .
Here was he merry , hearing of a song .
If he , compact of jars , grow musical , We shall have shortly discord in the spheres .
Go seek him .
Tell him I would speak with him .
He saves my labor by his own approach .
Why , how now , monsieur ?
What a life is this That your poor friends must woo your company ?
What , you look merrily .
And then he drew a dial from his poke And , looking on it with lackluster eye , Says very wisely , "It is ten o'clock .
Thus we may see , " quoth he , "how the world wags .
Tis but an hour ago since it was nine , And after one hour more 'twill be eleven .
O noble fool !
A worthy fool !
Motley's the only wear .
What fool is this ?
Oh , that I were a fool !
God be with my old master .
He would not have spoke such a word .
Is it even so ?
Begin you to grow upon me ?
I will physic your rankness and yet give no thousand crowns neither. , Holla , Dennis !
Calls your Worship ?
Was not Charles , the duke's wrestler , here to speak with me ?
So please you , he is here at the door and importunes access to you .
Call him in .
Twill be a good way , and tomorrow the wrestling is .
I must have liberty Withal , as large a charter as the wind , To blow on whom I please , for so fools have .
And they that are most galled with my folly , They most must laugh .
And why , sir , must they so ?
The "why" is plain as way to parish church : He that a fool doth very wisely hit Doth very foolishly , although he smart , Not to seem senseless of the bob .
Invest me in my motley .
Give me leave To speak my mind , and I will through and through Cleanse the foul body of th ' infected world , If they will patiently receive my medicine .
Fie on thee !
I can tell what thou wouldst do .
What , for a counter , would I do but good ?
Most mischievous foul sin in chiding sin , For thou thyself hast been a libertine , As sensual as the brutish sting itself , And all th ' embossed sores and headed evils That thou with license of free foot hast caught Wouldst thou disgorge into the general world .
Who can come in and say that I mean her , When such a one as she such is her neighbor ?
Forbear , and eat no more .
Why , I have eat none yet .
Nor shalt not till necessity be served .
Of what kind should this cock come of ?
Art thou thus boldened , man , by thy distress Or else a rude despiser of good manners , That in civility thou seem'st so empty ?
You touched my vein at first .
But forbear , I say .
An you will not be answered with reason , I must die .
What would you have ?
Your gentleness shall force More than your force move us to gentleness .
I almost die for food , and let me have it .
Sit down and feed , and welcome to our table .
Speak you so gently ?
Pardon me , I pray you .
I thought that all things had been savage here , And therefore put I on the countenance Of stern commandment .
True is it that we have seen better days And have with holy bell been knolled to church , And sat at good men's feasts and wiped our eyes Of drops that sacred pity hath engendered .
Then but forbear your food a little while Whiles , like a doe , I go to find my fawn And give it food .
There is an old poor man Who after me hath many a weary step Limped in pure love .
I thank you ; and be blessed for your good comfort .
Thou seest we are not all alone unhappy .
All the world's a stage , And all the men and women merely players .
They have their exits and their entrances , And one man in his time plays many parts , His acts being seven ages .
At first the infant , Mewling and puking in the nurse's arms .
Then the whining schoolboy with his satchel And shining morning face , creeping like snail Unwillingly to school .
And then the justice , In fair round belly with good capon lined , With eyes severe and beard of formal cut , Full of wise saws and modern instances ; And so he plays his part .
Welcome .
Set down your venerable burden , And let him feed .
I thank you most for him .
Welcome .
Fall to .
I will not trouble you As yet to question you about your fortunes. , Give us some music , and , good cousin , sing .
As if time were in debt .
How fondly dost thou reason !
Bear it straight , And bring thy master home immediately .
There's not a man I meet but doth salute me As if I were their well-acquainted friend , And every one doth call me by my name .
Some tender money to me ; some invite me ; Some other give me thanks for kindnesses ; Some offer me commodities to buy .
Even now a tailor called me in his shop And showed me silks that he had bought for me , And therewithal took measure of my body .
Sure , these are but imaginary wiles , And lapland sorcerers inhabit here .
Master , here's The gold you sent me for .
What Adam dost thou mean ?
Not that Adam that kept the Paradise , but that Adam that keeps the prison ; he that goes in the calf's skin that was killed for the Prodigal ; he that came behind you , sir , like an evil angel , and bid you forsake your liberty .
I understand thee not .
No ?
What , thou meanest an officer ?
Ay , sir , the sergeant of the band ; he that brings any man to answer it that breaks his band ; one that thinks a man always going to bed and says "God give you good rest." Well , sir , there rest in your foolery .
Is there any ships put forth tonight ?
May we be gone ?
Some blessed power deliver us from hence !
Well met , well met , Master Antipholus .
I see , sir , you have found the goldsmith now .
Is that the chain you promised me today ?
Satan , avoid !
I charge thee , tempt me not .
Master , is this Mistress Satan ?
It is the devil .
Nay , she is worse ; she is the devil's dam , and here she comes in the habit of a light wench .
Light is an effect of fire , and fire will burn : ergo , light wenches will burn .
Your man and you are marvelous merry , sir .
Will you go with me ?
We'll mend our dinner here .
Master , if you do , expect spoon meat ; or bespeak a long spoon .
Why , Dromio ?
I pray you , sir , my ring or else the chain .
I hope you do not mean to cheat me so .
Avaunt , thou witch ! , Come , Dromio , let us go .
Mistress , that you know .
Now , out of doubt Antipholus is mad ; Else would he never so demean himself .
A ring he hath of mine worth forty ducats , And for the same he promised me a chain .
Both one and other he denies me now .
The reason that I gather he is mad , Besides this present instance of his rage , Is a mad tale he told today at dinner Of his own doors being shut against his entrance .
Belike his wife , acquainted with his fits , On purpose shut the doors against his way .
My way is now to hie home to his house And tell his wife that , being lunatic , He rushed into my house and took perforce My ring away .
This course I fittest choose , For forty ducats is too much to lose .
Five summers have I spent in farthest Greece , Roaming clean through the bounds of Asia , And , coasting homeward , came to Ephesus , Hopeless to find , yet loath to leave unsought Or that or any place that harbors men .
But though thou art adjudged to the death , And passed sentence may not be recalled But to our honour's great disparagement , Yet will I favor thee in what I can .
Therefore , merchant , I'll limit thee this day To seek thy life by beneficial help .
I will , my lord .
Fear me not , man .
I tell you , 'twill sound harshly in her ears .
Here comes my man .
I think he brings the money .
How now , sir ?
Have you that I sent you for ?
Here's that , I warrant you , will pay them all .
But where's the money ?
Why , sir , I gave the money for the rope .
I'll serve you , sir , five hundred at the rate .
To what end did I bid thee hie thee home ?
To a rope's end , sir , and to that end am I returned .
And to that end , sir , I will welcome you .
Good sir , be patient .
Good now , hold thy tongue .
Nay , rather persuade him to hold his hands .
I would I were senseless , sir , that I might not feel your blows .
Thou art sensible in nothing but blows , and so is an ass .
I am an ass , indeed ; you may prove it by my long ears. , I have served him from the hour of my nativity to this instant , and have nothing at his hands for my service but blows .
Nay , I bear it on my shoulders as a beggar wont her brat , and I think when he hath lamed me , I shall beg with it from door to door .
Come , go along .
My wife is coming yonder .
Mistress , Wilt thou still talk ?
How say you now ?
Is not your husband mad ?
Mark how he trembles in his ecstasy .
I conjure thee by all the saints in heaven .
Peace , doting wizard , peace .
I am not mad .
O , that thou wert not , poor distressed soul !
You minion , you , are these your customers ?
Did this companion with the saffron face Revel and feast it at my house today Whilst upon me the guilty doors were shut And I denied to enter in my house ?
Dined at home" ?
Thou villain , what sayest thou ?
Sir , sooth to say , you did not dine at home .
Were not my doors locked up and I shut out ?
Perdie , your doors were locked , and you shut out .
And did not she herself revile me there ?
Sans fable , she herself reviled you there .
Did not her kitchen maid rail , taunt , and scorn me ?
And did not I in rage depart from thence ?
In verity you did. , My bones bear witness , That since have felt the vigour of his rage .
It is no shame .
Alas , I sent you money to redeem you By Dromio here , who came in haste for it .
Money by me !
Went'st not thou to her for a purse of ducats ?
He came to me , and I delivered it .
And I am witness with her that she did .
God and the rope-maker bear me witness That I was sent for nothing but a rope .
Mistress , both man and master is possessed .
I know it by their pale and deadly looks .
They must be bound and laid in some dark room .
I did not , gentle husband , lock thee forth .
And , gentle master , I received no gold .
But I confess , sir , that we were locked out .
Let him not come near me .
More company !
The fiend is strong within him .
What , will you murder me ? , Thou jailer , thou , I am thy prisoner .
Wilt thou suffer them To make a rescue ?
Masters , let him go .
He is my prisoner , and you shall not have him .
Go , bind this man , for he is frantic too .
He is my prisoner .
If I let him go , The debt he owes will be required of me .
I will discharge thee ere I go from thee .
Bear me forthwith unto his creditor , And , knowing how the debt grows , I will pay it. , Good Master Doctor , see him safe conveyed Home to my house .
O most unhappy day !
O most unhappy strumpet !
Master , I am here entered in bond for you .
How idly do they talk !
One Angelo , a goldsmith .
Do you know him ?
I know the man .
Two hundred ducats .
Say , how grows it due ?
Due for a chain your husband had of him .
He did bespeak a chain for me but had it not .
I long to know the truth hereof at large .
God for Thy mercy , they are loose again !
And come with naked swords .
Let's call more help To have them bound again .
Away !
They'll kill us .
I see these witches are afraid of swords .
She that would be your wife now ran from you .
I long that we were safe and sound aboard .
Faith , stay here this night .
They will surely do us no harm .
You saw they speak us fair , give us gold .
Methinks they are such a gentle nation that , but for the mountain of mad flesh
that claims marriage of me , i could find in my heart to stay here still , and turn witch .
I will not stay tonight for all the town .
Therefore away , to get our stuff aboard .
How is the man esteemed here in the city ?
His word might bear my wealth at any time .
Speak softly .
Tis so ; and that self chain about his neck Which he forswore most monstrously to have .
Good sir , draw near to me .
Therefore give out you are of Epidamnum , Lest that your goods too soon be confiscate .
There is your money that I had to keep .
Go bear it to the Centaur , where we host , And stay there , Dromio , till I come to thee .
Within this hour it will be dinnertime .
Till that , I'll view the manners of the town , Peruse the traders , gaze upon the buildings , And then return and sleep within mine inn , For with long travel I am stiff and weary .
Get thee away .
Many a man would take you at your word And go indeed , having so good a mean .
A trusty villain , sir , that very oft , When I am dull with care and melancholy , Lightens my humor with his merry jests .
What , will you walk with me about the town And then go to my inn and dine with me ?
I think I had .
I never did deny it .
Yes , that you did , sir , and forswore it too .
Who heard me to deny it or forswear it ?
These ears of mine , thou know'st did hear thee .
Fie on thee , wretch .
Tis pity that thou liv'st To walk where any honest men resort .
Thou art a villain to impeach me thus .
I'll prove mine honor and mine honesty Against thee presently if thou dar'st stand .
I dare , and do defy thee for a villain .
Run , master , run .
For God's sake , take a house .
This is some priory .
In , or we are spoiled .
Be quiet , people .
Wherefore throng you hither ?
To fetch my poor distracted husband hence .
Let us come in , that we may bind him fast And bear him home for his recovery .
How long hath this possession held the man ?
This week he hath been heavy , sour , sad , And much different from the man he was .
But till this afternoon his passion Ne'er brake into extremity of rage .
Hath not else his eye Stray'd his affection in unlawful love , A sin prevailing much in youthful men Who give their eyes the liberty of gazing ?
Which of these sorrows is he subject to ?
You should for that have reprehended him .
Why , so I did .
Ay , but not rough enough .
Haply in private .
And in assemblies too .
Ay , but not enough .
Alone , it was the subject of my theme ; In company I often glanced it .
Still did I tell him it was vile and bad .
And thereof came it that the man was mad .
The venom clamors of a jealous woman Poisons more deadly than a mad dog's tooth .
Thou sayst his meat was sauced with thy upbraidings .
Thou sayest his sports were hinderd by thy brawls .
In food , in sport , and life-preserving rest To be disturbed , would mad or man or beast .
The consequence is , then , thy jealous fits Have scared thy husband from the use of wits .
Good people , enter and lay hold on him .
Then let your servants bring my husband forth .
It is a branch and parcel of mine oath , A charitable duty of my order .
Therefore depart and leave him here with me .
Be quiet and depart .
Thou shalt not have him .
Complain unto the Duke of this indignity .
Come , go .
I will fall prostrate at his feet And never rise until my tears and prayers Have won his grace to come in person hither And take perforce my husband from the Abbess .
By this , I think , the dial points at five .
To see a reverend Syracusian merchant , Who put unluckily into this bay Against the laws and statutes of this town , Beheaded publicly for his offense .
See where they come .
We will behold his death .
Kneel to the duke before he pass the abbey .
Yet once again proclaim it publicly , If any friend will pay the sum for him , He shall not die ; so much we tender him .
Justice , most sacred duke , against the Abbess .
She is a virtuous and a reverend lady .
It can not be that she hath done thee wrong .
Therefore , most gracious duke , with thy command Let him be brought forth and borne hence for help .
Long since thy husband served me in my wars , And I to thee engaged a prince's word , When thou didst make him master of thy bed , To do him all the grace and good I could .
Peace , fool .
Thy master and his man are here , And that is false thou dost report to us .
Mistress , upon my life I tell you true .
I have not breathed almost since I did see it .
He cries for you , and vows , if he can take you , To scorch your face and to disfigure you .
Ay me , it is my husband .
Witness you That he is borne about invisible .
Even now we housed him in the abbey here , And now he's there , past thought of human reason .
Even for the blood That then I lost for thee , now grant me justice .
Beyond imagination is the wrong That she this day hath shameless thrown on me .
This day , great duke , she shut the doors upon me While she with harlots feasted in my house .
A grievous fault. , Say , woman , didst thou so ?
No , my good lord .
Myself , he , and my sister Today did dine together .
So befall my soul As this is false he burdens me withal .
Ne'er may I look on day , nor sleep on night But she tells to your Highness simple truth .
O perjured woman !
My liege , I am advised what I say , Neither disturbed with the effect of wine , Nor heady-rash , provoked with raging ire , Albeit my wrongs might make one wiser mad .
That goldsmith there , were he not packed with her , Could witness it , for he was with me then , Who parted with me to go fetch a chain , Promising to bring it to the Porpentine , Where Balthasar and I did dine together .
Our dinner done and he not coming thither , I went to seek him .
In the street I met him , And in his company that gentleman .
By th ' way we met My wife , her sister , and a rabble more Of vile confederates .
Along with them They brought one Pinch , a hungry , lean-faced villain , A mere anatomy , a mountebank , A threadbare juggler , and a fortune-teller , A needy , hollow-eyed , sharp-looking wretch , A living dead man .
This pernicious slave , Forsooth , took on him as a conjurer , And , gazing in mine eyes , feeling my pulse ,
But had he such a chain of thee or no ?
He had , my lord , and when he ran in here , These people saw the chain about his neck .
I never saw the chain , so help me heaven , And this is false you burden me withal .
Why , what an intricate impeach is this !
Soon at five o'clock , Please you , I'll meet with you upon the mart And afterward consort you till bedtime .
My present business calls me from you now .
Farewell till then .
I will go lose myself And wander up and down to view the city .
Sir , I commend you to your own content .
He that commends me to mine own content Commends me to the thing I can not get .
I to the world am like a drop of water That in the ocean seeks another drop , Who , falling there to find his fellow forth , Unseen , inquisitive , confounds himself .
So I , to find a mother and a brother , In quest of them , unhappy , lose myself .
How chance thou art returned so soon ?
Returned so soon ?
Rather approach'd too late !
The capon burns ; the pig falls from the spit ; The clock hath strucken twelve upon the bell ; My mistress made it one upon my cheek .
You say he dined at home ; the goldsmith here Denies that saying .
Sir , he dined with her there , at the Porpentine .
He did , and from my finger snatched that ring .
Tis true , my liege ; this ring I had of her .
Saw'st thou him enter at the abbey here ?
As sure , my liege , as I do see your Grace .
I think you are all mated or stark mad .
Most mighty duke , vouchsafe me speak a word .
Haply I see a friend will save my life And pay the sum that may deliver me .
Within this hour I was his bondman sir , But he , I thank him , gnawed in two my cords .
Now am I Dromio , and his man , unbound .
I am sure you both of you remember me .
You are not Pinch's patient , are you , sir ?
Why look you strange on me ?
you know me well .
I never saw you in my life till now .
O , grief hath changed me since you saw me last , And careful hours with time's deformed hand Have written strange defeatures in my face .
But tell me yet , dost thou not know my voice ?
Neither .
Dromio , nor thou ?
No , trust me , sir , nor I. I am sure thou dost .
Not know my voice !
O time's extremity , Hast thou so crack'd and splitted my poor tongue In seven short years that here my only son Knows not my feeble key of untuned cares ?
Though now this grained face of mine be hid In sap-consuming winter's drizzled snow , And all the conduits of my blood froze up , Yet hath my night of life some memory , My wasting lamps some fading glimmer left , My dull deaf ears a little use to hear .
All these old witnesses , I can not err , Tell me thou art my son Antipholus .
I never saw my father in my life .
But seven years since , in Syracusa , boy , Thou know'st we parted .
I see thy age and dangers make thee dote .
Most mighty duke , behold a man much wronged .
I see two husbands , or mine eyes deceive me .
I , sir , am Dromio .
Command him away .
I , sir , am Dromio .
Please , let me stay .
O , my old master. , Who hath bound him here ?
Whoever bound him , I will loose his bonds And gain a husband by his liberty. , Speak , old Egeon , if thou be'st the man That hadst a wife once called Emilia , That bore thee at a burden two fair sons .
O , if thou be'st the same Egeon , speak , And speak unto the same Emilia .
Why , here begins his morning story right ; These two Antipholuses , these two so like , And these two Dromios , one in semblance , Besides her urging of her wreck at sea , These are the parents to these children , Which accidentally are met together .
If I dream not , thou art Emilia .
If thou art she , tell me where is that son That floated with thee on the fatal raft ?
Corinth first .
Stay , stand apart .
I know not which is which .
I came from Corinth , my most gracious lord .
And I with him .
Brought to this town by that most famous warrior Duke Menaphon , your most renowned uncle .
Which of you two did dine with me today ?
I , gentle mistress .
And are not you my husband ?
That is the chain , sir , which you had of me .
I think it be , sir .
I deny it not .
And you , sir , for this chain arrested me .
I think I did , sir .
I deny it not .
I sent you money , sir , to be your bail By Dromio , but I think he brought it not .
No , none by me .
This purse of ducats I received from you , And Dromio my man did bring them me .
These ducats pawn I for my father here .
It shall not need .
Thy father hath his life .
Sir , I must have that diamond from you .
There , take it ; and much thanks for my good cheer .
Renowned duke , vouchsafe to take the pains To go with us into the abbey here And hear at large discoursed all our fortunes , And all that are assembled in this place That by this sympathized one day's error Have suffered wrong .
Go , keep us company , And we shall make full satisfaction. , Thirty-three years have I but gone in travail Of you , my sons , and till this present hour My heavy burden ne'er delivered. , The Duke , my husband , and my children both , And you , the calendars of their nativity , Go to a gossips ' feast , and go with me .
After so long grief , such nativity !
With all my heart I'll gossip at this feast .
Dromio , what stuff of mine hast thou embarked ?
Your goods that lay at host , sir , in the Centaur .
He speaks to me. , I am your master , Dromio .
There is a fat friend at your master's house That kitchened me for you today at dinner .
She now shall be my sister , not my wife .
Methinks you are my glass , and not my brother : I see by you I am a sweet-faced youth .
Will you walk in to see their gossiping ?
Not I , sir .
You are my elder .
That's a question .
How shall we try it ?
We'll draw cuts for the signior .
Till then , lead thou first .
Nay , then , thus : We came into the world like brother and brother , And now let's go hand in hand , not one before another .
Stop in your wind , sir .
Tell me this , I pray : Where have you left the money that I gave you ?
O , sixpence , that I had o ' Wednesday last To pay the saddler for my mistress ' crupper ?
The saddler had it , sir ; I kept it not .
I am not in a sportive humor now .
Tell me , and dally not : where is the money ?
We being strangers here , how dar'st thou trust So great a charge from thine own custody ?
I pray you , jest , sir , as you sit at dinner .
Methinks your maw , like mine , should be your clock , And strike you home without a messenger .
Come , Dromio , come , these jests are out of season .
Reserve them till a merrier hour than this .
Where is the gold I gave in charge to thee ?
To me , sir ?
Why , you gave no gold to me !
Come on , sir knave , have done your foolishness , And tell me how thou hast disposed thy charge .
My charge was but to fetch you from the mart Home to your house , the Phoenix , sir , to dinner .
My mistress and her sister stays for you .
Now , as I am a Christian , answer me In what safe place you have bestowed my money , Or I shall break that merry sconce of yours That stands on tricks when I am undisposed .
Where is the thousand marks thou hadst of me ?
Thy mistress ' marks ?
what mistress , slave , hast thou ?
What , wilt thou flout me thus unto my face , Being forbid ?
There , take you that , sir knave .
What mean you , sir ?
For God's sake , hold your hands .
Nay , an you will not , sir , I'll take my heels .
Upon my life , by some device or other The villain is o'erraught of all my money .
They say this town is full of cozenage , As nimble jugglers that deceive the eye , Dark-working sorcerers that change the mind , Soul-killing witches that deform the body , Disguised cheaters , prating mountebanks , And many suchlike liberties of sin .
Neither my husband nor the slave returned That in such haste I sent to seek his master ?
Sure , Luciana , it is two o'clock .
Perhaps some merchant hath invited him , And from the mart he's somewhere gone to dinner .
Good sister , let us dine and never fret .
A man is master of his liberty ; Time is their master , and when they see time They'll go or come .
If so , be patient , sister .
Why should their liberty than ours be more ?
Because their business still lies out o ' door .
Why , headstrong liberty is lashed with woe .
Then let your will attend on their accords .
This servitude makes you to keep unwed .
Not this , but troubles of the marriage bed .
But , were you wedded , you would bear some sway .
Ere I learn love , I'll practice to obey .
How if your husband start some otherwhere ?
Till he come home again , I would forbear .
Patience unmoved !
No marvel though she pause ; They can be meek that have no other cause .
A wretched soul , bruised with adversity We bid be quiet when we hear it cry , But were we burdened with like weight of pain , As much or more we should ourselves complain .
So thou , that hast no unkind mate to grieve thee , With urging helpless patience would relieve me ; But , if thou live to see like right bereft , This fool-begged patience in thee will be left .
Well , I will marry one day , but to try .
Say , is your tardy master now at hand ?
Know'st thou his mind ?
But say , I prithee , is he coming home ?
It seems he hath great care to please his wife .
Why , mistress , sure my master is horn mad .
Horn mad , thou villain !
I mean not cuckold mad , But sure he is stark mad .
My mistress , sir , " quoth I .
Hang up thy mistress !
Quoth my master .
I know , " quoth he , "no house , no wife , no mistress." So that my errand , due unto my tongue , I thank him , I bare home upon my shoulders , For , in conclusion , he did beat me there .
Go back again , thou slave , and fetch him home .
Go back again and be new beaten home ?
For God's sake , send some other messenger .
Back , slave , or I will break thy pate across .
Hence , prating peasant !
Fetch thy master home .
You spurn me hence , and he will spurn me hither .
If I last in this service , you must case me in leather .
Fie , how impatience loureth in your face .
His company must do his minions grace , Whilst I at home starve for a merry look .
Hath homely age th ' alluring beauty took From my poor cheek ?
Barren my wit ?
My decayed fair A sunny look of his would soon repair .
But , too unruly deer , he breaks the pale And feeds from home .
Poor I am but his stale .
Self-harming jealousy , fie , beat it hence .
I know his eye doth homage otherwhere , Or else what lets it but he would be here ?
Sister , you know he promised me a chain .
Would that alone o ' love he would detain , So he would keep fair quarter with his bed .
I see the jewel best enameled Will lose his beauty .
Yet the gold bides still That others touch , and often touching will Wear gold ; yet no man that hath a name By falsehood and corruption doth it shame .
Since that my beauty can not please his eye , I'll weep what's left away , and weeping die .
How many fond fools serve mad jealousy !
Proceed , Solinus , to procure my fall , And by the doom of death end woes and all .
For , since the mortal and intestine jars 'Twixt thy seditious countrymen and us , It hath in solemn synods been decreed Both by the Syracusians and ourselves , To admit no traffic to our adverse towns .
Nay , more , if any born at Ephesus Be seen at any Syracusian marts and fairs ; Again , if any Syracusian born Come to the bay of Ephesus , he dies , His goods confiscate to the Duke's dispose , Unless a thousand marks be levied To quit the penalty and to ransom him .
Thy substance , valued at the highest rate , Can not amount unto a hundred marks ; Therefore by law thou art condemned to die .
The gold I gave to Dromio is laid up Safe at the Centaur , and the heedful slave Is wandered forth , in care to seek me out .
By computation and mine host's report , I could not speak with Dromio since at first I sent him from the mart .
See , here he comes .
How now , sir ?
is your merry humor altered ?
You know no Centaur ?
You received no gold ?
Your mistress sent to have me home to dinner ?
My house was at the Phoenix ?
Wast thou mad , That thus so madly thou didst answer me ?
What answer , sir ?
When spake I such a word ?
I did not see you since you sent me hence , Home to the Centaur with the gold you gave me .
Villain , thou didst deny the gold's receipt And told'st me of a mistress and a dinner , For which , I hope , thou felt'st I was displeased .
I am glad to see you in this merry vein .
What means this jest ?
I pray you , master , tell me ?
Yea , dost thou jeer and flout me in the teeth ?
Think'st thou I jest ?
Hold , take thou that and that .
Hold , sir , for God's sake !
Now your jest is earnest .
Upon what bargain do you give it me ?
Because that I familiarly sometimes Do use you for my fool and chat with you , Your sauciness will jest upon my love And make a common of my serious hours .
Sconce" call you it ?
Shall I tell you why ?
Well , sir , I thank you .
Marry , sir , for this something that you gave me for nothing .
I'll make you amends next , to give you nothing for something .
But say , sir , is it dinnertime ?
In good time , sir , what's that ?
Basting .
Well , sir , then 'twill be dry .
If it be , sir , I pray you , eat none of it .
Your reason ?
Lest it make you choleric and purchase me another dry basting .
Well , sir , learn to jest in good time .
There's a time for all things .
I durst have denied that before you were so choleric .
By what rule , sir ?
Marry , sir , by a rule as plain as the plain bald pate of Father Time himself .
Let's hear it .
There's no time for a man to recover his hair that grows bald by nature .
Why is Time such a niggard of hair , being , as it is , so plentiful an excrement ?
Why , but there's many a man hath more hair than wit .
Why , thou didst conclude hairy men plain dealers without wit .
For what reason ?
For two , and sound ones too .
Nay , not sound , I pray you .
Sure ones , then .
Nay , not sure , in a thing falsing .
Certain ones , then .
Name them .
The one , to save the money that he spends in tiring ; the other , that at dinner they should not drop in his porridge .
You would all this time have proved there is no time for all things .
Thus I mend it : Time himself is bald and therefore , to the world's end , will have bald followers .
The time was once when thou unurged wouldst vow That never words were music to thine ear , That never object pleasing in thine eye , That never touch well welcome to thy hand , That never meat sweet-savored in thy taste , Unless I spake , or looked , or touched , or carved to thee .
How comes it now , my husband , O , how comes it That thou art thus estranged from thyself ?
Ah , do not tear away thyself from me !
I know you not .
When were you wont to use my sister thus ?
She sent for you by Dromio home to dinner .
By Dromio ?
By thee ; and this thou didst return from him : That he did buffet thee and , in his blows , Denied my house for his , me for his wife .
Did you converse , sir , with this gentlewoman ?
What is the course and drift of your compact ?
I , sir ?
I never saw her till this time .
Villain , thou liest ; for even her very words Didst thou deliver to me on the mart .
I never spake with her in all my life .
What , was I married to her in my dream ?
Or sleep I now and think I hear all this ?
What error drives our eyes and ears amiss ?
Until I know this sure uncertainty I'll entertain the offered fallacy .
Dromio , go bid the servants spread for dinner .
O , for my beads !
I cross me for a sinner .
This is the fairy land .
O spite of spites !
We talk with goblins , owls , and sprites : If we obey them not , this will ensue : They'll suck our breath , or pinch us black and blue .
Why prat'st thou to thyself and answer'st not ?
Dromio , thou , Dromio , thou snail , thou slug , thou sot .
I am transformed , master , am I not ?
I think thou art in mind , and so am I. Nay , master , both in mind and in my shape .
Tis true .
I am an ass ; else it could never be But I should know her as well as she knows me .
Come , come , no longer will I be a fool , To put the finger in the eye and weep Whilst man and master laugh my woes to scorn .
Come , sir , to dinner. , Dromio , keep the gate .
Husband , I'll dine above with you today , And shrive you of a thousand idle pranks .
Am I in earth , in heaven , or in hell ?
Known unto these , and to myself disguised !
Master , shall I be porter at the gate ?
Ay ; and let none enter , lest I break your pate .
Well , Syracusian , say in brief the cause Why thou dep-artedst from thy native home And for what cause thou camest to Ephesus .
In Syracusa was I born , and wed Unto a woman happy but for me , And by me , had not our hap been bad .
That very hour , and in the selfsame inn , A meaner woman was delivered Of such a burden , male twins , both alike .
Unwilling , I agreed .
Alas , too soon We came aboard .
Good Signior Angelo , you must excuse us all ; My wife is shrewish when I keep not hours .
Say that I lingered with you at your shop To see the making of her carcanet , And that tomorrow you will bring it home .
But here's a villain that would face me down He met me on the mart , and that I beat him And charged him with a thousand marks in gold , And that I did deny my wife and house. , Thou drunkard , thou , what didst thou mean by this ?
Say what you will , sir , but I know what I know .
I think thou art an ass .
You're sad , Signior Balthasar .
I hold your dainties cheap , sir , and your welcome dear .
Good meat , sir , is common ; that every churl affords .
And welcome more common , for that's nothing but words .
Small cheer and great welcome makes a merry feast .
Ay , to a niggardly host and more sparing guest .
But though my cates be mean , take them in good part .
Better cheer may you have , but not with better heart .
But soft !
My door is lock'd .
Maud , Bridget , Marian , Ciceley , Gillian , Ginn !
My master stays in the street .
Who talks within there ?
Ho , open the door .
Wherefore ?
For my dinner .
I have not dined today .
What art thou that keep'st me out from the house I owe ?
O villain , thou hast stolen both mine office and my name !
O Lord , I must laugh .
Have at you with a proverb : shall I set in my staff ?
Do you hear , you minion ?
You'll let us in , I hope ?
So , come , help .
Well struck !
There was blow for blow .
Thou baggage , let me in .
Master , knock the door hard .
You'll cry for this , minion , if I beat the door down .
Are you there , wife ?
You might have come before .
If you went in pain , master , this knave would go sore .
In debating which was best , we shall part with neither .
You would say so , master , if your garments were thin .
Your cake there is warm within ; you stand here in the cold .
It would make a man mad as a buck to be so bought and sold .
Go , fetch me something : I'll break ope the gate .
Here's too much "out upon thee ! " I pray thee , let me in .
Well , I'll break in .
Go , borrow me a crow .
A crow without feather ?
Master , mean you so ?
For a fish without a fin , there's a fowl without a feather. , Go , get thee gone .
Fetch me an iron crow .
Have patience , sir .
O , let it not be so .
And doubt not , sir , but she will well excuse Why at this time the doors are made against you .
Be ruled by me ; depart in patience , And let us to the Tiger all to dinner , And about evening come yourself alone To know the reason of this strange restraint .
You have prevailed .
I will depart in quiet And , in despite of mirth , mean to be merry .
I know a wench of excellent discourse , Pretty and witty , wild and yet , too , gentle .
There will we dine .
That chain will I bestow , Be it for nothing but to spite my wife , Upon mine hostess there .
I'll meet you at that place some hour hence .
Do so .
This jest shall cost me some expense .
Shall , Antipholus , Even in the spring of love thy love-springs rot ?
If you did wed my sister for her wealth , Then for her wealth's sake use her with more kindness .
What simple thief brags of his own attaint ?
Tis double wrong to truant with your bed And let her read it in thy looks at board .
Though others have the arm , show us the sleeve ; We in your motion turn , and you may move us .
Then , gentle brother , get you in again .
Sweet mistress , what your name is else I know not , Nor by what wonder you do hit of mine , ,
Less in your knowledge and your grace you show not Than our earth's wonder , more than earth divine .
Teach me , dear creature , how to think and speak .
Against my soul's pure truth why labour you To make it wander in an unknown field ?
Are you a god ?
would you create me new ?
Transform me , then , and to your power I'll yield .
But if that I am I , then well I know Your weeping sister is no wife of mine , Nor to her bed no homage do I owe .
Far more , far more , to you do I decline .
O , train me not , sweet mermaid , with thy note To drown me in thy sister's flood of tears .
What , are you mad that you do reason so ?
It is a fault that springeth from your eye .
For gazing on your beams , fair sun , being by .
Why call you me "love" ?
Call my sister so .
Thy sister's sister .
That's my sister .
No , It is thyself , mine own self's better part , Mine eye's clear eye , my dear heart's dearer heart , My food , my fortune , and my sweet hope's aim , My sole earth's heaven , and my heaven's claim .
All this my sister is , or else should be .
Call thyself "sister , " sweet , for I am thee .
Give me thy hand .
O soft , sir !
Hold you still .
I'll fetch my sister to get her goodwill .
Why , how now , Dromio .
Where runn'st thou so fast ?
Do you know me , sir ?
Am I Dromio ?
Am I your man ?
Am I myself ?
The children thus disposed , my wife and I , Fixing our eyes on whom our care was fixed , Fastened ourselves at either end the mast And , floating straight , obedient to the stream , Was carried towards Corinth , as we thought .
But ere they came , -O , let me say no more !
Thou art Dromio , thou art my man , thou art thyself .
I am an ass , I am a woman's man , and besides myself .
What woman's man ?
And how besides thyself ?
What claim lays she to thee ?
What is she ?
Marry , sir , she's the kitchen wench , and all grease , and I know not what use to put her to but to make a lamp of her and run from her by her own light .
I warrant her rags and the
If she lives till doomsday , she'll burn a week longer than the whole world .
What complexion is she of ?
Swart like my shoe , but her face nothing like so clean kept .
That's a fault that water will mend .
No , sir , 'tis in grain ; Noah's flood could not do it .
What's her name ?
Then she bears some breadth ?
She is spherical , like a globe .
In what part of her body stands Ireland ?
Marry , sir , in her buttocks .
Faith , I saw it not , but I felt it hot in her breath .
Where America , the Indies ?
O , sir , upon her nose , all o'er-embellished with rubies , carbuncles , sapphires , declining their rich aspect to the hot breath of Spain , who sent whole armadas of caracks to be ballast at her nose .
And , I think , if my breast had not been made of faith , and my heart of steel , She had transformed me to a curtal dog and made me turn i ' th ' wheel .
An if the wind blow any way from shore , I will not harbor in this town tonight .
If any bark put forth , come to the mart , Where I will walk till thou return to me .
If every one knows us , and we know none , 'T is time , I think , to trudge , pack , and be gone .
As from a bear a man would run for life , So fly I from her that would be my wife .
There's none but witches do inhabit here , And therefore 'tis high time that I were hence .
She that doth call me husband , even my soul Doth for a wife abhor .
But lest myself be guilty to self wrong , I'll stop mine ears against the mermaid's song .
I know it well , sir .
Lo , here's the chain .
What is your will that I shall do with this ?
I have made it for you .
Made it for me , sir ?
I bespoke it not .
Not once , nor twice , but twenty times you have .
You are a merry man , sir .
Fare you well .
What I should think of this I can not tell , But this I think : there's no man is so vain That would refuse so fair an offered chain .
I'll to the mart , and there for Dromio stay .
If any ship put out , then straight away .
Even just the sum that I do owe to you Is growing to me by Antipholus .
At five o'clock I shall receive the money for the same .
Pleaseth you walk with me down to his house , I will discharge my bond and thank you too .
Saving your merry humor , here's the note How much your chain weighs to the utmost carat , The fineness of the gold , and chargeful fashion , Which doth amount to three-odd ducats more Than I stand debted to this gentleman .
I pray you , see him presently discharged , For he is bound to sea , and stays but for it .
I am not furnished with the present money .
Besides , I have some business in the town .
Then you will bring the chain to her yourself .
Well , sir , I will .
Have you the chain about you ?
Nay , come , I pray you , sir , give me the chain .
Both wind and tide stays for this gentleman , And I , to blame , have held him here too long .
Good Lord !
You use this dalliance to excuse Your breach of promise to the Porpentine .
I should have chid you for not bringing it , But , like a shrew , you first begin to brawl .
The hour steals on .
I pray you , sir , dispatch .
You hear how he importunes me .
The chain !
Why , give it to my wife , and fetch your money .
Come , come .
You know I gave it you even now .
Either send the chain , or send me by some token .
Fie , now you run this humor out of breath .
Come , where's the chain ?
I pray you , let me see it .
I answer you ?
What should I answer you ?
The money that you owe me for the chain .
I owe you none till I receive the chain .
You know I gave it you half an hour since .
You wrong me more , sir , in denying it .
Consider how it stands upon my credit .
Well , officer , arrest him at my suit .
I do , This touches me in reputation .
Consent to pay thee that I never had ? , Arrest me , foolish fellow , if thou dar'st .
Here is thy fee .
Arrest him , officer .
I would not spare my brother in this case If he should scorn me so apparently .
I do arrest you , sir .
You hear the suit .
I do obey thee till I give thee bail .
But , sirrah , you shall buy this sport as dear As all the metal in your shop will answer .
Sir , sir , I will have law in Ephesus , To your notorious shame , I doubt it not .
Nay , forward , old man .
Do not break off so , For we may pity though not pardon thee .
O , had the gods done so , I had not now Worthily termed them merciless to us .
Thus have you heard me severed from my bliss ; That by misfortunes was my life prolonged To tell sad stories of my own mishaps .
And for the sake of them thou sorrowest for , Do me the favour to dilate at full What hath befall'n of them and thee till now .
Our fraughtage , sir , I have conveyed aboard , and I have bought The oil , the balsamum and aqua vitae .
Why , thou peevish sheep , What ship of Epidamnum stays for me ?
A ship you sent me to , to hire waftage .
Thou drunken slave , I sent thee for a rope And told thee to what purpose and what end .
You sent me for a rope's end as soon .
You sent me to the bay , sir , for a bark .
I will debate this matter at more leisure And teach your ears to list me with more heed .
To Adriana , villain , hie thee straight .
Give her this key , and tell her in the desk That's cover'd o'er with Turkish tapestry There is a purse of ducats .
Let her send it .
Tell her I am arrested in the street , And that shall bail me .
Hie thee , slave .
Begone. , On , officer , to prison till it come .
To Adriana .
That is where we dined , Where Dowsabel did claim me for her husband .
She is too big , I hope , for me to compass .
Thither I must , although against my will , For servants must their masters ' minds fulfill .
Ah , Luciana , did he tempt thee so ?
Looked he or red or pale , or sad or merrily ?
First he denied you had in him no right .
He meant he did me none ; the more my spite .
Then swore he that he was a stranger here .
Then pleaded I for you .
And what said he ?
That love i begged for you he begged of me .
With what persuasion did he tempt thy love ?
Have patience , I beseech .
Who would be jealous , then , of such a one ?
No evil lost is wailed when it is gone .
Ah , but I think him better than I say , And yet would herein others ' eyes were worse .
My heart prays for him , though my tongue do curse .
How hast thou lost thy breath ?
By running fast .
Where is thy master , Dromio ?
Is he well ?
No , he's in Tartar limbo , worse than hell .
The passages of alleys , creeks , and narrow lands ; A hound that runs counter and yet draws dryfoot well , One that before the judgment carries poor souls to hell .
Why , man , what is the matter ?
Tell me at whose suit .
I know not at whose suit he is arrested well , But he's in a suit of buff which 'rested him ; that can I tell .
Go fetch it , sister .
This I wonder at , That he , unknown to me , should be in debt .
Do you not hear it ring ?
What , the chain ?
No , no , the bell .
Tis time that I were gone .
It was two ere I left him , and now the clock strikes one .
That did I never hear .
Excellent well .
You are a fishmonger .
Not I , my lord .
Then I would you were so honest a man .
Honest , my lord ?
Ay , sir .
To be honest , as this world goes , is to be one man picked out of ten thousand .
That's very true , my lord .
For if the sun breed maggots in a dead dog , being a good kissing carrion , Have you a daughter ?
I have , my lord .
Let her not walk i ' th ' sun .
Conception is a blessing , but , as your daughter may conceive , Friend , look to 't .
Words , words , words .
What is the matter , my lord ?
Between who ?
I mean , the matter that you read , my lord .
Slanders , sir .
Into my grave .
Indeed , that is out of the air .
You can not , sir , take from me any thing that I will more willingly part withal , except my life , except my life , except my life .
Fare you well , my lord .
You go to seek the Lord Hamlet .
There he is .
God save you , sir !
My honored lord !
My most dear lord !
My excellent good friends !
How dost thou , Guildenstern ?
Ah , Rosencrantz !
Good lads , how do you both ?
Happy , in that we are not overhappy .
On Fortune's cap we are not the very button .
Then you live about her waist , or in the middle of her favors ?
Faith , her privates we .
What news ?
But your news is not true .
Let me question more in particular .
What have you , my good friends , deserved at the hands of fortune that she sends you to prison hither ?
Prison , my lord ?
Denmark's a prison .
Then is the world one .
A goodly one , in which there are many confines , wards , and dungeons , Denmark being one o ' th ' worst .
We think not so , my lord .
Why , then , 'tis none to you , for there is nothing either good or bad , but thinking makes it so .
To me it is a prison .
Why then , your ambition makes it one .
Tis too narrow for your mind .
Which dreams indeed are ambition , for the very substance of the ambitious is merely the shadow of a dream .
A dream itself is but a shadow .
Truly , and I hold ambition of so airy and light a quality that it is but a shadow's shadow .
Then are our beggars bodies , and our monarchs and outstretched heroes the beggars ' shadows .
Shall we to th ' court ?
Beggar that I am , I am even poor in thanks ; but I thank you , and sure , dear friends , my thanks are too dear a halfpenny .
Is it your own inclining ?
What should we say , my lord ?
You were sent for , and there is a kind of confession in your looks which your modesties have not craft enough to color .
I know the good king and queen have sent for you .
To what end , my lord ?
That you must teach me .
My lord , we were sent for .
What might be toward , that this sweaty haste Doth make the night joint laborer with the day ?
Who is 't that can inform me ?
That can I .
I will tell you why .
Why did you laugh then , when I said "man delights not me" ?
He that plays the king shall be welcome .
The adventurous knight shall use his foil and target , the lover shall not sigh gratis , the humorous man shall end his part in peace , the clown shall make those laugh whose lungs are tickle o ' th ' sear , and the lady shall say her mind freely , or the blank verse shall halt for 't .
What players are they ?
Even those you were wont to take delight in , the tragedians of the city .
How chances it they travel ?
Their residence , both in reputation and profit , was better both ways .
I think their inhibition comes by the means of the late innovation .
Do they hold the same estimation they did when I was in the city ?
Are they so followed ?
No , indeed are they not .
How comes it ?
Do they grow rusty ?
Nay , their endeavor keeps in the wonted pace .
But there is , sir , an eyrie of children , little eyases , that cry out on the top of question and are most tyrannically clapped for 't .
These are now the fashion , and so berattle the common stages , so they call them , that many wearing rapiers are afraid of goose quills and dare scarce come thither .
What , are they children ?
Who maintains 'em ?
How are they escoted ?
Will they pursue the quality no longer than they can sing ?
Will they not say afterwards , if they should grow themselves to common players ( as it is most like if their means are no better ) , their writers do them wrong to make them exclaim against their own succession ?
Faith , there has been much to do on both sides , and the nation holds it no sin to tar them to controversy .
There was , for a while , no money bid for argument unless the poet and the player went to cuffs in the question .
Is 't possible ?
Oh , there has been much throwing about of brains .
Do the boys carry it away ?
It is not very strange .
For my uncle is King of Denmark , and those that would make mouths at him while my father lived give twenty , forty , fifty , a hundred ducats apiece for his picture in little .
Sblood , there is something in this more than natural , if philosophy could find it out .
There are the players .
Gentlemen , you are welcome to Elsinore .
Your hands , come then .
Let me comply with you in this garb , lest my extent to the players , which , I tell you , must show fairly outwards , should more appear like entertainment than yours .
You are welcome .
But my uncle-father and aunt-mother are deceived .
In what , my dear lord ?
I am but mad north-north-west .
When the wind is southerly , I know a hawk from a handsaw .
Well be with you , gentlemen .
Hark you , Guildenstern , and you too , at each ear a hearer .
Happily he's the second time come to them , for they say an old man is twice a child .
My lord , I have news to tell you .
My lord , I have news to tell you .
When Roscius was an actor in Rome , The actors are come hither , my lord .
Buzz , buzz .
Upon my honor , Then came each actor on his ass ,
Why , Am I not i ' th ' right , old Jephthah ?
If you call me Jephthah , my lord , I have a daughter that I love passing well .
What follows , then , my lord ?
Why ,
You are welcome , masters , welcome , all ! , I am glad to see thee well. , Welcome , good friends. , O old friend ?
What speech , my good lord ?
But it was , as I received it , and others , whose judgments in such matters cried in the top of mine , an excellent play , well digested in the scenes , set down with as much modesty as cunning .
One speech in it I chiefly loved .
This is too long .
It shall to the barber's , with your beard. , Prithee , say on .
The mobled queen" ?
That's good .
Mobled queen" is good .
Look whe'e he has not turned his color and has tears in 's eyes. , Prithee , no more .
My lord , I will use them according to their desert .
God's bodykins , man , much better .
Use them after your own honor and dignity .
The less they deserve , the more merit is in your bounty .
Take them in .
Come , sirs .
Follow him , friends .
We'll hear a play tomorrow .
Ay , my lord .
We'll ha 't tomorrow night .
You could , for a need , study a speech of some dozen or sixteen lines which I would set down and insert in 't , could you not ?
Ay , my lord .
Very well .
Follow that lord , and look you mock him not .
My good friends , I'll leave you till night .
You are welcome to Elsinore .
Good my lord .
Now I am alone .
Oh , what a rogue and peasant slave am I !
And all for nothing , For Hecuba !
And terms compulsatory , those foresaid lands So by his father lost .
In the most high and palmy state of Rome , A little ere the mightiest Julius fell , The graves stood tenantless and the sheeted dead Did squeak and gibber in the Roman streets As stars with trains of fire and dews of blood , Disasters in the sun , and the moist star Upon whose influence Neptune's empire stands Was sick almost to doomsday with eclipse .
But soft , behold !
Lo , where it comes again .
I'll cross it though it blast me. , Stay , illusion !
If thou hast any sound or use of voice , Speak to me .
Am I a coward ?
Plucks off my beard and blows it in my face ?
Tweaks me by the nose ?
Who does me this ?
Bloody , bawdy villain !
Remorseless , treacherous , lecherous , kindless villain !
O vengeance !
Why , what an ass am I !
Fie upon 't , foh !
For murder , though it have no tongue , will speak With most miraculous organ .
If he do blench , I know my course .
I'll have grounds More relative than this .
The play's the thing Wherein I'll catch the conscience of the king .
And can you by no drift of conference Get from him why he puts on this confusion , Grating so harshly all his days of quiet With turbulent and dangerous lunacy ?
Did he receive you well ?
Most like a gentleman .
Niggard of question , but of our demands Most free in his reply .
Madam , it so fell out , that certain players We o'erraught on the way .
They are about the court , And , as I think , they have already order This night to play before him .
Tis most true , And he beseeched me to entreat your Majesties To hear and see the matter .
With all my heart , and it doth much content me To hear him so inclined .
Good gentlemen , give him a further edge , And drive his purpose on to these delights .
We shall , my lord .
I shall obey you .
Madam , I wish it may .
Ophelia , walk you here .
Let's withdraw , my lord .
To die , to sleep , No more , and by a sleep to say we end The heartache and the thousand natural shocks That flesh is heir to , 'tis a consummation Devoutly to be wished !
To die , to sleep .
There's the respect That makes calamity of so long life .
For who would bear the whips and scorns of time , Th ' oppressor's wrong , the proud man's contumely , The pangs of despised love , the law's delay , The insolence of office , and the spurns That patient merit of th ' unworthy takes , When he himself might his quietus make With a bare bodkin ?
Who would fardels bear , To grunt and sweat under a weary life , But that the dread of something after death , The undiscovered country from whose bourn No traveler returns , puzzles the will And makes us rather bear those ills we have Than fly to others that we know not of ?
Good my lord , How does your honor for this many a day ?
I humbly thank you .
Well , well , well .
My lord , I have remembrances of yours That I have longed long to redeliver .
I pray you now receive them .
There , my lord .
Ha , ha , are you honest ?
My lord ?
Are you fair ?
What means your lordship ?
That if you be honest and fair , your honesty should admit no discourse to your beauty .
Could beauty , my lord , have better commerce than with honesty ?
Ay , truly , for the power of beauty will sooner transform honesty from what it is to a bawd than the force of honesty can translate beauty into his likeness .
This was sometime a paradox , but now the time gives it proof .
I did love you once .
Indeed , my lord , you made me believe so .
I loved you not .
I was the more deceived .
Get thee to a nunnery .
I am very proud , revengeful , ambitious , with more offences at my beck than I have thoughts to put them in , imagination to give them shape , or time to act them in .
What should such fellows as I do crawling between earth and heaven ?
We are arrant knaves , all .
Believe none of us .
Go thy ways to a nunnery .
Where's your father ?
At home , my lord .
Let the doors be shut upon him , that he may play the fool no where but in 's own house .
Farewell .
O , help him , you sweet heavens !
Get thee to a nunnery , go .
Farewell .
Farewell .
Heavenly powers , restore him !
I have heard of your paintings too , well enough .
God has given you one face and you make yourselves another .
You jig and amble , and you lisp , you nickname God's creatures and make your wantonness your ignorance .
Go to , I'll no more on 't .
It hath made me mad .
I say , we will have no more marriages .
Those that are married already , all but one , shall live .
The rest shall keep as they are .
To a nunnery , go .
Love ?
His affections do not that way tend .
Haply the seas and countries different With variable objects shall expel This something-settled matter in his heart , Whereon his brains still beating puts him thus From fashion of himself .
What think you on 't ?
It shall do well .
But yet do I believe The origin and commencement of his grief Sprung from neglected love. , How now , Ophelia ?
You need not tell us what Lord Hamlet said .
Let her be round with him , And I'll be placed , so please you , in the ear Of all their conference .
If she find him not , To England send him or confine him where Your wisdom best shall think .
It shall be so .
If there be any good thing to be done That may to thee do ease and grace to me , Speak to me .
Or if thou hast uphoarded in thy life Extorted treasure in the womb of earth , For which , they say , you spirits oft walk in death , Speak of it .
Stay and speak !
Stop it , Marcellus .
Shall I strike at it with my partisan ?
Do , if it will not stand .
Tis here .
Tis here .
Tis gone .
It was about to speak when the cock crew .
Speak the speech , I pray you , as I pronounced it to you , trippingly on the tongue .
Oh , it offends me to the soul to hear a robustious periwig-pated fellow tear a passion to tatters , to very rags , to split the ears of the groundlings , who for the most part are capable of nothing but inexplicable dumb-shows and noise .
I would have such a fellow whipped for o'erdoing Termagant .
Pray you , avoid it .
I warrant your honor .
Be not too tame neither , but let your own discretion be your tutor .
I hope we have reformed that indifferently with us , sir .
O , reform it altogether !
And let those that play your clowns speak no more than is set down for them , for there be of them that will themselves laugh to set on some quantity of barren spectators to laugh too , though in the meantime some necessary question of the play be then to be considered .
And the queen too , and that presently .
Bid the players make haste .
Will you two help to hasten them ?
Ay , my lord .
What ho , Horatio !
Here , sweet lord , at your service .
Horatio , thou art e'en as just a man As e'er my conversation coped withal .
O my dear lord , Nay , do not think I flatter .
For what advancement may I hope from thee That no revenue hast but thy good spirits , To feed and clothe thee ?
Why should the poor be flattered ?
No , let the candied tongue lick absurd pomp , And crook the pregnant hinges of the knee Where thrift may follow fawning .
Dost thou hear ?
Since my dear soul was mistress of her choice And could of men distinguish , her election Hath sealed thee for herself , for thou hast been , As one in suffering all that suffers nothing , A man that Fortune's buffets and rewards Hast ta'en with equal thanks .
Give him heedful note .
They are coming to the play .
I must be idle .
Get you a place .
How fares our cousin Hamlet ?
Excellent , i ' faith , of the chameleon's dish .
I eat the air , promise-crammed .
You can not feed capons so .
I have nothing with this answer , Hamlet .
These words are not mine .
No , nor mine now .
That did I , my lord , and was accounted a good actor .
What did you enact ?
I did enact Julius Caesar .
I was killed i ' th ' Capitol .
Brutus killed me .
Ay , my lord .
They stay upon your patience .
No , good mother .
Here's metal more attractive .
Lady , shall I lie in your lap ?
No , my lord .
I mean , my head upon your lap ?
Ay , my lord .
Do you think I meant country matters ?
What is , my lord ?
Nothing .
You are merry , my lord .
Who , I ?
Ay , my lord .
O God , your only jig-maker .
What should a man do but be merry ?
For , look you , how cheerfully my mother looks , and my father died within these two hours .
Nay , 'tis twice two months , my lord .
So long ?
Nay then , let the devil wear black , for I'll have a suit of sables .
Then there's hope a great man's memory may outlive his life half a year .
But , by 'r Lady , he must build churches then , or else shall he suffer not thinking on , with the hobby-horse , whose epitaph is "For , oh , for , oh , the hobby-horse is forgot." What means this , my lord ?
Marry , this is miching
Belike this show imports the argument of the play .
We shall know by this fellow .
The players can not keep counsel .
They'll tell all .
Will he tell us what this show meant ?
Ay , or any show that you will show him .
Be not you ashamed to show , he'll not shame to tell you what it means .
You are naught , you are naught .
I'll mark the play .
Is this a prologue or the posy of a ring ?
Tis brief , my lord .
As woman's love .
Madam , how like you this play ?
The lady protests too much , methinks .
Oh , but she'll keep her word .
Is there no offense in 't ?
No offense i ' th ' world .
What do you call the play ?
It faded on the crowing of the cock .
Do you consent we shall acquaint him with it , As needful in our loves , fitting our duty ?
I could interpret between you and your love , if I could see the puppets dallying .
Come , "The croaking raven doth bellow for revenge , "
The story is extant , and writ in choice Italian .
You shall see anon how the murderer gets the love of Gonzago's wife .
The king rises .
What , frighted with false fire ?
How fares my lord ?
Give me some light , away !
Lights , lights , lights !
A whole one , I .
Didst perceive ?
Very well , my lord .
Upon the talk of the poisoning ?
I did very well note him .
Ah ha !
Come , some music !
Come , the recorders !
Come , some music !
Good my lord , vouchsafe me a word with you .
Sir , a whole history .
The king , sir , Ay , sir , what of him ?
Is in his retirement marvelous distempered .
I am tame , sir .
Pronounce .
The queen your mother , in most great affliction of spirit , hath sent me to you .
You are welcome .
Nay , good my lord , this courtesy is not of the right breed .
If it shall please you to make me a wholesome answer , I will do your mother's commandment .
If not , your pardon and my return shall be the end of my business .
Sir , I can not .
What , my lord ?
Make you a wholesome answer .
My wit's diseased .
Therefore no more but to the matter .
O wonderful son that can so 'stonish a mother !
But is there no sequel at the heels of this mother's admiration ?
Impart .
She desires to speak with you in her closet ere you go to bed .
We shall obey , were she ten times our mother .
Have you any further trade with us ?
My lord , you once did love me .
And do still , by these pickers and stealers .
Good my lord , what is your cause of distemper ?
Sir , I lack advancement .
How can that be , when you have the voice of the king himself for your succession in Denmark ?
I do not well understand that .
Will you play upon this pipe ?
My lord , I can not .
I pray you .
Believe me , I can not .
I do beseech you .
I know no touch of it , my lord .
It is as easy as lying .
But these can not I command to any utterance of harmony .
You would seem to know my stops .
Sblood , do you think I am easier to be played on than a pipe ?
Call me what instrument you will , though you can fret me , yet you can not play upon me .
God bless you , sir .
My lord , the queen would speak with you , and presently .
Do you see yonder cloud that's almost in shape of a camel ?
By th ' mass , and 'tis like a camel indeed .
Methinks it is like a weasel .
It is backed like a weasel .
Or like a whale .
Very like a whale .
Then I will come to my mother by and by .
I will say so .
Tis now the very witching time of night , When churchyards yawn and hell itself breathes out Contagion to this world .
Now could I drink hot blood And do such bitter business as the bitter day Would quake to look on .
I will speak daggers to her but use none .
My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites .
I like him not , nor stands it safe with us To let his madness range .
Therefore prepare you .
I your commission will forthwith dispatch , And he to England shall along with you .
The terms of our estate may not endure Hazard so dangerous as doth hourly grow Out of his lunacies .
We will ourselves provide .
The cease of majesty Dies not alone , but , like a gulf , doth draw What's near it with it .
It is a massy wheel Fixed on the summit of the highest mount , To whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things Are mortised and adjoined , which , when it falls , Each small annexment , petty consequence , Attends the boisterous ruin .
Never alone Did the king sigh , but with a general groan .
Arm you , I pray you , to this speedy voyage .
For we will fetters put upon this fear , Which now goes too free-footed .
We will haste us .
My lord , he's going to his mother's closet .
Behind the arras I'll convey myself To hear the process .
I'll warrant she'll tax him home .
And , as you said ( and wisely was it said ) 'T is meet that some more audience than a mother , Since nature makes them partial , should o'erhear The speech , of vantage .
Fare you well , my liege .
I'll call upon you ere you go to bed And tell you what I know .
Thanks , dear my lord .
It hath the primal eldest curse upon 't , A brother's murder .
So much for him .
That can not be , since I am still possessed Of those effects for which I did the murder : My crown , mine own ambition , and my queen .
May one be pardoned and retain th ' offense ?
In the corrupted currents of this world Offense's gilded hand may shove by justice , And oft 'tis seen the wicked prize itself Buys out the law .
But 'tis not so above .
What can it not ?
Yet what can it when one can not repent ?
O bosom black as death !
O limed soul that , struggling to be free , Art more engaged !
Help , angels .
Make assay .
Now might I do it pat .
Now he is a-praying .
And now I'll do 't .
And so he goes to heaven .
And so am I revenged. , That would be scanned .
And am I then revenged
No .
Words without thoughts never to heaven go .
He will come straight .
Conceit in weakest bodies strongest works .
Speak to her , Hamlet .
To whom do you speak this ?
Avoid what is to come .
O Hamlet , thou hast cleft my heart in twain .
Good night , but go not to mine uncle's bed .
Assume a virtue if you have it not .
So , again , good night .
I must be cruel only to be kind .
Thus bad begins and worse remains behind .
Twere good you let him know , For who that's but a queen , fair , sober , wise , Would from a paddock , from a bat , a gib , Such dear concernings hide ?
Let it work , For 'tis the sport to have the engineer Hoist with his own petard .
You must translate .
Tis fit we understand them .
Ah , my good lord , what have I seen tonight !
How does Hamlet ?
O heavy deed !
Alas , how shall this bloody deed be answered ?
But , like the owner of a foul disease , To keep it from divulging , let it feed Even on the pith of life .
Where is he gone ?
Go seek him out , speak fair , and bring the body Into the chapel .
Safely stowed .
What have you done , my lord , with the dead body ?
Tell us where 'tis , that we may take it thence And bear it to the chapel .
Believe what ?
But such officers do the king best service in the end .
I am glad of it .
Yet must not we put the strong law on him .
Without , my lord ; guarded , to know your pleasure .
Bring him before us .
Not where he eats , but where he is eaten .
That's the end .
What dost you mean by this ?
Therefore prepare thyself .
The bark is ready and the wind at help , Th ' associates tend , and everything is bent For England .
Farewell , dear mother .
Thy loving father , Hamlet .
My mother .
Do it , England , For like the hectic in my blood he rages , And thou must cure me .
I will do 't , my lord .
Go softly on .
They are of Norway , sir .
What says Polonius ?
Take thy fair hour , Laertes .
Thou know'st 'tis common .
Ay , madam , it is common .
God be wi ' you , sir .
Go a little before .
What is a man If his chief good and market of his time Be but to sleep and feed ?
A beast , no more .
I will not speak with her .
What would she have ?
Where is the beauteous majesty of Denmark ?
Nay , but , Ophelia , Pray you , mark .
How do you , pretty lady ?
God be at your table .
Conceit upon her father .
How long hath she been thus ?
We must be patient , but I can not choose but weep , to think they should lay him i ' th ' cold ground .
Oh , this is the poison of deep grief .
Poor Ophelia Divided from herself and her fair judgment , Without the which we are pictures , or mere beasts .
Alack , what noise is this ?
I pray you , give me leave .
Do not fear our person .
Conscience and grace , to the profoundest pit !
I dare damnation .
Who shall stay you ?
My will , not all the world .
And for my means , I'll husband them so well , They shall go far with little .
Will you know them then ?
How now ?
What noise is that ?
Tears seven times salt , Burn out the sense and virtue of mine eye !
By heaven , thy madness shall be paid by weight , Till our scale turn the beam .
You must sing This nothing's more than matter .
There's rosemary , that's for remembrance .
Nay , it is .
Do you see this , O God ?
Laertes , I must commune with your grief , Or you deny me right .
Let this be so .
So you shall .
Seafaring men , sir .
Let them come in .
Let him bless thee too .
Fare-well .
Now must your conscience my acquaintance seal , And you must put me in your heart for friend , Sith you have heard , and with a knowing ear , That he which hath your noble father slain Pursued my life .
It well appears .
Letters , my lord , from Hamlet .
Sailors , my lord , they say .
I saw them not .
He received them Of him that brought them .
How otherwise ? , Will you be ruled by me ?
He is the brooch indeed And gem of all the nation .
Why ask you this ?
And nothing is at a like goodness still .
But , good Laertes , Will you do this , keep close within your chamber .
I will do 't .
Therefore this project
Be as ourself in Denmark. , Madam , come .
Come away .
One woe doth tread upon another's heel , So fast they follow. , Your sister's drowned , Laertes .
Alas , then she is drowned .
But yet It is our trick .
Let's follow , Gertrude .
How much I had to do to calm his rage !
Now fear I this will give it start again .
Therefore let's follow .
Is she to be buried in Christian burial when she willfully seeks her own salvation ?
The crowner hath sat on her and finds it Christian burial .
How can that be , unless she drowned herself in her own defense ?
It must be Nay , but hear you , Goodman Delver , Give me leave .
But is this law ?
Ay , marry , is 't .
Crowner's quest law .
Come , my spade .
Why , he had none .
Marry , now I can tell .
Has this fellow no feeling of his business ?
He sings at grave- making .
That skull had a tongue in it and could sing once .
It might , my lord .
Ay , my lord .
Mine ache to think on 't .
Not a jot more , my lord .
I will speak to this fellow. , Whose grave's this , sirrah ?
You lie out on 't , sir , and therefore it is not yours .
Tis for the dead , not for the quick .
Therefore thou liest .
What man dost thou dig it for ?
What woman , then ?
The age is grown so picked that the toe of the peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier he galls his kibe. , How long hast thou been a grave-maker ?
Of all the days i ' the year , I came to 't that day that our last King Hamlet overcame Fortinbras .
Ay , marry , why was he sent into England ?
Why , because he was mad .
Why ?
Twill not be seen in him there .
How came he mad ?
How "strangely" ?
Faith , e'en with losing his wits .
Why he more than another ?
Let me see .
That he might not beteem the winds of heaven Visit her face too roughly. , Heaven and earth , Must I remember ?
Why , she would hang on him As if increase of appetite had grown By what it fed on , and yet , within a month , Let me not think on 't .
Within a month , Ere yet the salt of most unrighteous tears Had left the flushing in her galled eyes , She married .
It is not nor it can not come to good , But break , my heart , for I must hold my tongue .
Hail to your lordship .
I am glad to see you well. , Horatio ?
Or I do forget myself ?
Sir , my good friend , I'll change that name with you .
My good lord .
What's that , my lord ?
Dost thou think Alexander looked o ' this fashion i ' th ' earth ?
E'en so .
And smelt so ?
Pah !
E'en so , my lord .
To what base uses we may return , Horatio .
Why may not imagination trace the noble dust of Alexander till he find it stopping a bunghole ?
Twere to consider too curiously , to consider so .
No , faith , not a jot .
Imperious Caesar , dead and turned to clay , Might stop a hole to keep the wind away .
Oh , that that earth , which kept the world in awe , Should patch a wall t ' expel the winter's flaw !
But soft , but soft a while .
Here comes the king , The queen , the courtiers , who is this they follow , And with such maimed rites ?
This doth betoken The corse they follow did with desperate hand Fordo its own life .
Couch we a while and mark .
What ceremony else ?
For charitable prayers Shards , flints and pebbles should be thrown on her .
Yet here she is allowed her virgin crants , Her maiden strewments , and the bringing home Of bell and burial .
Must there no more be done ?
No more be done .
We should profane the service of the dead To sing a requiem and such rest to her As to peace-parted souls .
Lay her i ' th ' earth , And from her fair and unpolluted flesh May violets spring !
I tell thee , churlish priest , A ministering angel shall my sister be When thou liest howling .
Sweets to the sweet .
Farewell !
Oh , treble woe Fall ten times treble on that cursed head , Whose wicked deed thy most ingenious sense Deprived thee of !
Hold off the earth awhile Till I have caught her once more in mine arms .
Hold off thy hand .
Pluck them asunder .
O my son , what theme ?
I loved Ophelia .
Forty thousand brothers Could not with all their quantity of love Make up my sum .
What wilt thou do for her ?
O , he is mad , Laertes .
For love of God , forbear him .
Swounds , show me what thou'lt do .
Woo't weep ?
Woo't fight ?
Woo't fast ?
Woo't tear thyself ?
I'll do 't .
And if thou prate of mountains let them throw Millions of acres on us , till our ground , Singeing his pate against the burning zone , Make Ossa like a wart !
This is mere madness .
And thus a while the fit will work on him .
Anon , as patient as the female dove When that her golden couplets are disclosed , His silence will sit drooping .
I loved you ever .
But it is no matter .
I pray thee , good Horatio , wait upon him .
Who's there ?
Long live the king !
Barnardo ?
He .
You come most carefully upon your hour .
Tis now struck twelve .
Get thee to bed , Francisco .
For this relief much thanks .
Tis bitter cold , And I am sick at heart .
Have you had quiet guard ?
Not a mouse stirring .
Well , good night .
If you do meet Horatio and Marcellus , The rivals of my watch , bid them make haste .
I think I hear them. , Stand , ho !
So much for this , sir .
Now shall you see the other .
You do remember all the circumstance ?
Remember it , my lord ?
Sir , in my heart there was a kind of fighting That would not let me sleep .
Methought I lay Worse than the mutines in the bilboes .
Is 't possible ?
I beseech you .
Wilt thou know Th ' effect of what I wrote ?
Ay , good my lord .
I had my father's signet in my purse , Which was the model of that Danish seal .
Folded the writ up in form of th ' other , Subscribed it , gave 't th ' impression , placed it safely , The changeling never known .
Now , the next day Was our sea fight , and what to this was sequent Thou know'st already .
So Guildenstern and Rosencrantz go to 't .
Why , man , they did make love to this employment .
They are not near my conscience .
Their defeat Does by their own insinuation grow .
Tis dangerous when the baser nature comes Between the pass and fell incensed points Of mighty opposites .
Why , what a king is this !
is 't not perfect conscience To quit him with this arm ?
And is 't not to be damned To let this canker of our nature come In further evil ?
It must be shortly known to him from England What is the issue of the business there .
It will be short .
The interim's mine .
I'll court his favors .
But sure the bravery of his grief did put me Into a towering passion .
Peace. , Who comes here ?
Your lordship is right welcome back to Denmark .
I humbly thank you , sir .
Sweet lord , if your lordship were at leisure , I should impart a thing to you from His Majesty .
I thank your lordship .
It is very hot .
It is indifferent cold , my lord , indeed .
But yet methinks it is very sultry and hot for my complexion .
Exceedingly , my lord .
It is very sultry , as 'twere , I can not tell how .
My lord , his majesty bade me signify to you that he has laid a great wager on your head .
Sir , this is the matter , I beseech you , remember , Nay , good my lord , for mine ease , in good faith .
Sir , his definement suffers no perdition in you , though I know to divide him inventorially would dizzy th ' arithmetic of memory , and yet but yaw neither , in respect of his quick sail .
A truant disposition , good my lord .
I would not hear your enemy say so , Nor shall you do mine ear that violence , To make it truster of your own report Against yourself .
I know you are no truant .
But what is your affair in Elsinore ?
We'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart .
My lord , I came to see your father's funeral .
I pray thee , do not mock me , fellow student .
I think it was to see my mother's wedding .
Indeed , my lord , it followed hard upon .
The funeral baked meats Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables .
Would I had met my dearest foe in heaven Or ever I had seen that day , Horatio .
My father , methinks I see my father .
Where , my lord ?
In my mind's eye , Horatio .
I saw him once .
He was a goodly king .
He was a man .
Take him for all in all .
I shall not look upon his like again .
Your lordship speaks most infallibly of him .
The concernancy , sir ?
Why do we wrap the gentleman in our more rawer breath ?
Sir ?
I know you are not ignorant , I would you did , sir .
Yet in faith , if you did , it would not much approve me .
Well , sir ?
You are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes is ,
I dare not confess that lest I should compare with him in excellence , but to know a man well were to know himself .
I mean , sir , for his weapon .
Rapier and dagger .
That's two of his weapons .
But well .
The king , sir , hath wagered with him six Barbary horses , against the which he has impawned , as I take it , six French rapiers and poniards with their assigns , as girdle , hangers , and so .
Three of the carriages , in faith , are very dear to fancy , very responsive to the hilts , most delicate carriages , and of very liberal conceit .
What call you the carriages ?
The carriages , sir , are the hangers .
The phrase would be more germane to the matter if we could carry cannon by our sides .
I would it might be hangers till then .
But , on : six Barbary horses against six French swords , their assigns , and three liberal-conceited carriages , that's the French bet against the Danish .
Why is this "impawned , " as you call it ?
The king , sir , hath laid that in a dozen passes between yourself and him , he shall not exceed you three hits .
How if I answer "No" ?
If it please His Majesty , 'tis the breathing time of day with me .
I commend my duty to your lordship .
Yours , yours .
He does well to commend it himself .
There are no tongues else for 's turn .
He did comply , sir , with his dug before he sucked it .
He sends to know if your pleasure hold to play with Laertes , or that you will take longer time .
I am constant to my purpose .
They follow the king's pleasure .
If his fitness speaks , mine is ready , now or whensoever , provided I be so able as now .
The king and queen and all are coming down .
In happy time .
The queen desires you to use some gentle entertainment to Laertes before you fall to play .
She well instructs me .
You will lose this wager , my lord .
I do not think so .
Since he went into France , I have been in continual practice .
I shall win at the odds .
But thou wouldst not think how ill all's here about my heart .
But it is no matter .
I will forestall their repair hither and say you are not fit .
Not a whit .
We defy augury .
If it be not to come , it will be now .
Since no man of aught he leaves knows , what is 't to leave betimes ?
Let be .
Come , Hamlet , come , and take this hand from me .
But in my terms of honor I stand aloof , and will no reconcilement Till by some elder masters , of known honor , I have a voice and precedent of peace To keep my name ungored .
Come , one for me .
I'll be your foil , Laertes .
You mock me , sir .
No , by this hand .
Very well , my lord .
Your grace hath laid the odds o ' th ' weaker side .
I have seen you both .
But since he is better we have therefore odds .
Ay , my good lord .
Set me the stoups of wine upon that table .
If Hamlet give the first or second hit Or quit in answer of the third exchange , Let all the battlements their ordnance fire !
The king shall drink to Hamlet's better breath , And in the cup an union shall he throw Richer than that which four successive kings In Denmark's crown have worn .
Give me the cups .
Come on , sir .
Come , my lord .
One .
No .
Judgment ?
A hit , a very palpable hit .
Well , again .
Stay , give me drink. , Hamlet , this pearl is thine .
Here's to thy health .
Give him the cup .
Set it by a while .
Come .
Another hit .
What say you ?
A touch , a touch , I do confess 't .
Our son shall win .
He's fat , and scant of breath. , Here , Hamlet , take my napkin , rub thy brows .
The queen carouses to thy fortune , Hamlet .
Good madam .
Gertrude , do not drink .
I will , my lord .
I pray you , pardon me .
I dare not drink yet , madam .
By and by .
Come , let me wipe thy face .
I do not think 't .
Come , for the third , Laertes .
You do but dally .
I pray you , pass with your best violence .
I am afeard you make a wanton of me .
Say you so ?
Come on .
Have at you now !
Part them !
They are incensed .
Nay , come , again .
Look to the queen there , ho !
They bleed on both sides. , How is it , my lord ?
How is 't , Laertes ?
Why , as a woodcock to mine own springe , Osric .
How does the queen ?
She swoons to see them bleed .
The drink , the drink !
I am poisoned .
O villainy !
Ho , let the door be locked .
Treachery !
Seek it out .
It is here , Hamlet .
Hamlet , thou art slain .
No medicine in the world can do thee good .
In thee there is not half an hour of life .
The treacherous instrument is in thy hand , Unbated and envenomed .
The foul practice Hath turned itself on me .
Lo , here I lie , Never to rise again .
Thy mother's poisoned .
I can no more .
The king , the king's to blame .
The point envenomed too ! , Then , venom , to thy work .
My lord , I think I saw him yesternight .
Saw who ?
The king my father ? !
Season your admiration for a while With an attent ear , till I may deliver , Upon the witness of these gentlemen , This marvel to you .
For God's love , let me hear .
Two nights together had these gentlemen , Marcellus and Barnardo , on their watch , In the dead waste and middle of the night , Been thus encountered : a figure like your father , Armed at point exactly , cap-a-pie , Appears before them and with solemn march Goes slow and stately by them .
Thrice he walked By their oppressed and fear-surprised eyes Within his truncheon's length , whilst they , distilled Almost to jelly with the act of fear , Stand dumb and speak not to him .
I knew your father .
But where was this ?
Treason !
Treason !
O , yet defend me , friends .
I am but hurt .
Here , thou incestuous , murderous , damned Dane , Drink off this potion .
Is thy union here ?
Follow my mother .
He is justly served .
It is a poison tempered by himself .
Exchange forgiveness with me , noble Hamlet .
Mine and my father's death come not upon thee , Nor thine on me .
Heaven make thee free of it .
Thou livest .
Never believe it .
I am more an antique Roman than a Dane .
Here's yet some liquor left .
As thou'rt a man , Give me the cup .
Let go !
By heaven , I'll have 't .
O God , Horatio , what a wounded name , Things standing thus unknown , shall live behind me !
If thou didst ever hold me in thy heart Absent thee from felicity a while , And in this harsh world draw thy breath in pain To tell my story .
What warlike noise is this ?
Young Fortinbras , with conquest come from Poland , To th ' ambassadors of England gives This warlike volley .
O , I die , Horatio .
The potent poison quite o'ercrows my spirit .
I can not live to hear the news from England .
But I do prophesy the election lights On Fortinbras .
He has my dying voice .
O , O , O , O .
Where is this sight ?
What is it ye would see ?
This quarry cries on havoc .
O proud death , What feast is toward in thine eternal cell , That thou so many princes at a shot So bloodily hast struck ?
The sight is dismal , And our affairs from England come too late .
The ears are senseless that should give us hearing , To tell him his commandment is fulfilled , That Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead .
Had it th ' ability of life to thank you .
For me , with sorrow I embrace my fortune .
Let four captains Bear Hamlet like a soldier to the stage , For he was likely , had he been put on , To have proved most royally .
And , for his passage , The soldiers ' music and the rites of war Speak loudly for him .
Take up the bodies .
My lord , upon the platform where we watch .
Did you not speak to it ?
My lord , I did , But answer made it none .
Tis very strange .
As I do live , my honored lord , 'tis true .
And we did think it writ down in our duty To let you know of it .
Indeed , indeed , sirs , but this troubles me .
Hold you the watch tonight ?
We do , my lord .
Armed , say you ?
Armed , my lord .
From top to toe ?
My lord , from head to foot .
Then saw you not his face ?
Oh yes , my lord .
He wore his beaver up .
Pale or red ?
Nay , very pale .
And fixed his eyes upon you ?
Most constantly .
I would I had been there .
Stayed it long ?
While one with moderate haste might tell a hundred .
Longer , longer .
Not when I saw 't .
His beard was grizzled , no ?
It was , as I have seen it in his life , A sable silvered .
I will watch tonight .
Perchance 'Twill walk again .
I warrant it will .
If it assume my noble father's person , I'll speak to it , though Hell itself should gape And bid me hold my peace .
I pray you all , If you have hitherto concealed this sight , Let it be tenable in your silence still .
And whatsoever else shall hap tonight , Give it an understanding , but no tongue .
I will requite your loves .
So fare you well .
Upon the platform , 'twixt eleven and twelve , I'll visit you .
Our duty to your honor .
Your loves , as mine to you .
Farewell .
My father's spirit in arms .
All is not well .
I doubt some foul play .
Would the night were come !
Till then sit still , my soul .
Foul deeds will rise , Though all the earth o'erwhelm them , to men's eyes .
My necessaries are embarked .
Farewell .
And , sister , as the winds give benefit And convey is assistant , do not sleep , But let me hear from you .
Do you doubt that ?
For Hamlet and the trifling of his favor , Hold it a fashion and a toy in blood , A violet in the youth of primy nature , Forward , not permanent , sweet , not lasting , The perfume and suppliance of a minute .
No more .
No more but so ?
Think it no more .
Then weigh what loss your honor may sustain If with too credent ear you list his songs , Or lose your heart , or your chaste treasure open To his unmastered importunity .
Fear it , Ophelia .
Fear it , my dear sister , And keep you in the rear of your affection , Out of the shot and danger of desire .
And in the morn and liquid dew of youth , Contagious blastments are most imminent .
Be wary , then .
Best safety lies in fear .
Youth to itself rebels , though none else near .
I shall the effect of this good lesson keep As watchman to my heart .
O , fear me not .
I stay too long .
But here my father comes .
Yet here , Laertes ?
Aboard , aboard , for shame !
The wind sits in the shoulder of your sail And you are stayed for .
There , my blessing with thee .
And these few precepts in thy memory Look thou character .
Give thy thoughts no tongue , Nor any unproportioned thought his act .
Be thou familiar but by no means vulgar .
Beware Of entrance to a quarrel , but being in , Bear 't that th ' opposed may beware of thee .
Give every man thy ear but few thy voice .
Take each man's censure but reserve thy judgment .
Farewell .
Your servants tend .
Tis in my memory locked , And you yourself shall keep the key of it .
Farewell .
What is 't , Ophelia , he hath said to you ?
So please you , something touching the Lord Hamlet .
If it be so as so 'tis put on me , And that in way of caution , I must tell you , You do not understand yourself so clearly As it behooves my daughter and your honor .
What is between you ?
Give me up the truth .
He hath , my lord , of late made many tenders Of his affection to me .
Affection !
Pooh , you speak like a green girl , Unsifted in such perilous circumstance .
Do you believe his "tenders , " as you call them ?
I do not know , my lord , what I should think .
Marry , I'll teach you .
Think yourself a baby That you have ta'en these tenders for true pay , Which are not sterling .
Tender yourself more dearly , Or , not to crack the wind of the poor phrase , Running it thus , you'll tender me a fool .
Go to , go to .
And hath given countenance to his speech , my lord , With almost all the holy vows of heaven .
Ay , springes to catch woodcocks .
I do know , When the blood burns , how prodigal the soul Lends the tongue vows .
For Lord Hamlet , Believe so much in him that he is young , And with a larger tether may he walk Than may be given you .
Look to 't , I charge you .
Come your ways .
I shall obey , my lord .
Friends to this ground .
And liegemen to the Dane .
Give you good night .
O , farewell , honest soldier .
Who hath relieved you ?
Barnardo has my place .
Give you good night .
Say what , is Horatio there ?
A piece of him .
What , has this thing appeared again tonight ?
I have seen nothing .
Horatio says 'tis but our fantasy And will not let belief take hold of him Touching this dreaded sight twice seen of us .
Therefore I have entreated him along With us to watch the minutes of this night , That if again this apparition come He may approve our eyes and speak to it .
It is a nipping and an eager air .
What hour now ?
I think it lacks of twelve .
No , it is struck .
Indeed ?
I heard it not .
It then draws near the season Wherein the spirit held his wont to walk .
What does this mean , my lord ?
Is it a custom ?
Ay , marry , is 't .
But to my mind , though I am native here And to the manner born , it is a custom More honored in the breach than the observance .
This heavy-headed revel east and west Makes us traduced and taxed of other nations .
They clepe us drunkards and with swinish phrase Soil our addition .
And indeed it takes From our achievements , though performed at height , The pith and marrow of our attribute .
The dram of evil Doth all the noble substance of a doubt To his own scandal .
Look , my lord , it comes !
Angels and ministers of grace defend us !
Be thou a spirit of health or goblin damned , Bring with thee airs from heaven or blasts from hell , Be thy intents wicked or charitable , Thou comest in such a questionable shape That I will speak to thee .
I'll call thee "Hamlet , " "King , " "Father , " "royal Dane." O , answer me !
Let me not burst in ignorance , but tell Why thy canonized bones , hearsed in death , Have burst their cerements ; why the sepulcher ,
Wherein we saw thee quietly interred , Hath oped his ponderous and marble jaws To cast thee up again .
Wherefore ?
It beckons you to go away with it , As if it some impartment did desire To you alone .
Look , with what courteous action It waves you to a more removed ground .
But do not go with it .
No , by no means .
Do not , my lord .
Why , what should be the fear ?
I do not set my life in a pin's fee , And for my soul , what can it do to that , Being a thing immortal as itself ?
It waves me forth again .
I'll follow it .
And there assume some other horrible form , Which might deprive your sovereignty of reason And draw you into madness ?
Think of it .
It waves me still .
You shall not go , my lord .
Hold off your hands .
Be ruled .
You shall not go .
Still am I called. , Unhand me , gentlemen .
By heaven , I'll make a ghost of him that lets me .
He waxes desperate with imagination .
Let's follow .
Tis not fit thus to obey him .
Nay , let's follow him .
Where wilt thou lead me ?
Speak , I'll go no further .
Mark me .
I will .
My hour is almost come When I to sulfurous and tormenting flames Must render up myself .
Alas , poor ghost !
Speak .
I am bound to hear .
So art thou to revenge when thou shalt hear .
What ?
I am thy father's spirit , Doomed for a certain term to walk the night And for the day confined to fast in fires , Till the foul crimes done in my days of nature Are burnt and purged away .
But that I am forbid To tell the secrets of my prison house , I could a tale unfold whose lightest word Would harrow up thy soul , freeze thy young blood ,
Make thy two eyes , like stars , start from their spheres , Thy knotted and combined locks to part And each particular hair to stand on end , Like quills upon the fearful porpentine .
But this eternal blazon must not be To ears of flesh and blood .
List , list , O , list !
If thou didst ever thy dear father love , O God !
Revenge his foul and most unnatural murder .
Murder ?
Murder most foul , as in the best it is .
But this most foul , strange and unnatural .
Haste me to know 't , that I , with wings as swift As meditation or the thoughts of love , May sweep to my revenge .
My uncle ?
O Hamlet , what a falling off was there !
From me , whose love was of that dignity That it went hand in hand even with the vow I made to her in marriage , and to decline Upon a wretch whose natural gifts were poor To those of mine .
Brief let me be .
Thus was I , sleeping , by a brother's hand Of life , of crown , of queen at once dispatched , Cut off even in the blossoms of my sin ,
Oh , horrible , oh , horrible , most horrible !
If thou hast nature in thee , bear it not .
Let not the royal bed of Denmark be A couch for luxury and damned incest .
Leave her to heaven And to those thorns that in her bosom lodge To prick and sting her .
Fare thee well at once .
The glowworm shows the matin to be near , And 'gins to pale his uneffectual fire .
Adieu , adieu , adieu .
Remember me .
O all you host of heaven !
O earth !
What else ?
And shall I couple hell ?
Oh , fie !
Hold , hold , my heart , And you , my sinews , grow not instant old , But bear me stiffly up .
Remember thee !
Ay , thou poor ghost , whiles memory holds a seat In this distracted globe .
Remember thee !
Yea , from the table of my memory I'll wipe away all trivial fond records , All saws of books , all forms , all pressures past That youth and observation copied there , And thy commandment all alone shall live Within the book and volume of my brain , Unmixed with baser matter .
Yes , by heaven !
O most pernicious woman !
O villain , villain , smiling , damned villain !
My tables ! , Meet it is I set it down That one may smile , and smile , and be a villain .
At least I'm sure it may be so in Denmark .
Remember me." I have sworn 't .
My lord , my lord !
Lord Hamlet , Heaven secure him !
So be it .
Illo , ho , ho , my lord !
Hillo , ho , ho , boy .
Come , bird , come .
How is 't , my noble lord ?
What news , my lord ?
Oh , wonderful !
Good my lord , tell it .
Not I , my lord , by heaven .
Nor I , my lord .
How say you , then ?
But you'll be secret ?
Ay , by heaven , my lord .
Sit down a while And let us once again assail your ears , That are so fortified against our story , What we have two nights seen .
Well , sit we down , And let us hear Barnardo speak of this .
Last night of all , When yond same star that's westward from the pole Had made his course t ' illume that part of heaven Where now it burns , Marcellus and myself , The bell then beating one , Peace , break thee off .
Look where it comes again !
In the same figure like the king that's dead .
Most like .
It harrows me with fear and wonder .
It would be spoke to .
Question it , Horatio .
By heaven , I charge thee , speak .
There's ne'er a villain dwelling in all Denmark But he's an arrant knave .
There needs no ghost , my lord , come from the grave To tell us this .
Why , right , you are in the right .
And so , without more circumstance at all , I hold it fit that we shake hands and part .
You , as your business and desire shall point you , For every man has business and desire , Such as it is , and for my own poor part , Look you , I'll go pray .
These are but wild and whirling words , my lord .
There's no offense , my lord .
Yes , by Saint Patrick , but there is , Horatio , And much offense too .
Touching this vision here , It is an honest ghost , that let me tell you .
For your desire to know what is between us , O'ermaster 't as you may .
And now , good friends , As you are friends , scholars and soldiers , Give me one poor request .
What is 't , my lord ?
We will .
Never make known what you have seen tonight .
My lord , we will not .
Nay , but swear 't .
In faith , my lord , not I .
Nor I , my lord , in faith .
Upon my sword .
We have sworn , my lord , already .
Indeed , upon my sword , indeed .
Consent to swear .
Never to speak of this that you have seen .
Swear by my sword .
Come hither , gentlemen , And lay your hands again upon my sword .
Swear by my sword Never to speak of this that you have heard .
Well said , old mole !
A worthy pioneer !
Once more remove , good friends .
O day and night , but this is wondrous strange !
And therefore as a stranger give it welcome .
There are more things in heaven and earth , Horatio , Than are dreamt of in your philosophy .
This not to do , So grace and mercy at your most need help you , Swear .
Nay , come , let's go together .
Give him this money and these notes , Reynaldo .
I will , my lord .
You shall do marvelous wisely , good Reynaldo , Before you visit him , to make inquire Of his behavior .
My lord , I did intend it .
Marry , well said , very well said .
Take you , as 'twere , some distant knowledge of him , As thus : "I know his father and his friends , And , in part , him." Do you mark this , Reynaldo ?
Ay , very well , my lord .
And in part him , but , " you may say , "not well .
Addicted so and so. , " And there put on him What forgeries you please .
But , sir , such wanton , wild , and usual slips
Ay , or drinking , fencing , swearing , Quarreling , drabbing , you may go so far .
My lord , that would dishonor him !
Faith , no , as you may season it in the charge .
But , my good lord , Wherefore should you do this ?
Ay , my lord .
I would know that .
Very good , my lord .
And then , sir , does he this , he does , What was I about to say ?
By the mass , I was about to say something .
Where did I leave ?
I saw him yesterday" , or "t ' other day , " Or then , or then , with such or such , "and , as you say , There was he gaming , there o'ertook in's rouse , There falling out at tennis , " or , perchance , "I saw him enter such a house of sale" , Your bait of falsehood takes this carp of truth .
You have me , have you not ?
My lord , I have .
God be wi ' you .
Fare you well .
Good my lord .
I shall , my lord .
And let him ply his music .
Well , my lord .
Farewell .
With what , i ' th ' name of God ?
Mad for thy love ?
What said he ?
Long stayed he so .
At last , a little shaking of mine arm And thrice his head thus waving up and down , He raised a sigh so piteous and profound As it did seem to shatter all his bulk And end his being .
Come , go with me .
I will go seek the king .
This is the very ecstasy of love , Whose violent property fordoes itself And leads the will to desperate undertakings As oft as any passion under heaven That does afflict our natures .
I am sorry .
That hath made him mad .
I am sorry that with better heed and judgment I had not quoted him .
I feared he did but trifle And meant to wreck thee .
But beshrew my jealousy !
By heaven , it is as proper to our age To cast beyond ourselves in our opinions As it is common for the younger sort To lack discretion .
Come , go we to the king .
Welcome , dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern .
Moreover that we much did long to see you , The need we have to use you did provoke Our hasty sending .
Something have you heard Of Hamlet's "transformation" , so call it Since nor th ' exterior nor the inward man Resembles that it was .
What it should be , More than his father's death , that thus hath put him So much from th ' understanding of himself , I can not dream of .
Both your majesties Might , by the sovereign power you have of us , Put your dread pleasures more into command Than to entreaty .
But we both obey And here give up ourselves , in the full bent , To lay our service freely at your feet To be commanded .
Thanks , Rosencrantz and gentle Guildenstern .
Thanks , Guildenstern and gentle Rosencrantz .
And I beseech you instantly to visit My too much changed son .
Go , some of you , And bring these gentlemen where Hamlet is .
Heavens make our presence and our practices Pleasant and helpful to him !
Ay , amen !
Th ' ambassadors from Norway , my good lord , Are joyfully returned .
Thou still hast been the father of good news .
Have I , my lord ?
I assure my good liege , I hold my duty as I hold my soul , Both to my God and to my gracious king .
It is offended .
See , it stalks away .
Stay !
I charge thee , speak !
How now , Horatio ?
You tremble and look pale .
Is not this something more than fantasy ?
What think you on 't ?
Before my God , I might not this believe Without the sensible and true avouch Of mine own eyes .
Is it not like the king ?
As thou art to thyself .
Such was the very armour he had on When he the ambitious Norway combated .
So frowned he once when , in an angry parle , He smote the sledded Polacks on the ice .
Tis strange .
And I do think , or else this brain of mine Hunts not the trail of policy so sure As it hath used to do , that I have found The very cause of Hamlet's lunacy .
Oh , speak of that .
That do I long to hear .
Give first admittance to th ' ambassadors .
My news shall be the fruit to that great feast .
Thyself do grace to them , and bring them in .
He tells me , my dear Gertrude , he hath found The head and source of all your son's distemper .
I doubt it is no other but the main : His father's death and our o'erhasty marriage .
Well , we shall sift him. , Welcome , my good friends !
Say , Voltemand , what from our brother Norway ?
Whereat grieved , That so his sickness , age , and impotence Was falsely borne in hand , sends out arrests On Fortinbras , which he , in brief , obeys , Receives rebuke from Norway , and in fine Makes vow before his uncle never more To give th ' assay of arms against your majesty .
Whereon old Norway , overcome with joy ,
Gives him three thousand crowns in annual fee And his commission to employ those soldiers , So levied as before , against the Polack , With an entreaty , herein further shown , That it might please you to give quiet pass Through your dominions for this enterprise , On such regards of safety and allowance As therein are set down .
Meantime we thank you for your well-took labor .
Go to your rest .
At night we'll feast together .
Most welcome home !
This business is well ended .
My liege and madam , to expostulate What majesty should be , what duty is , Why day is day , night night , and time is time , Were nothing but to waste night , day , and time .
Therefore , since brevity is the soul of wit And tediousness the limbs and outward flourishes , I will be brief : your noble son is mad .
Mad call I it , for , to define true madness , What is 't but to be nothing else but mad ?
But let that go .
Thus it remains , and the remainder thus .
I have a daughter , have while she is mine , Who in her duty and obedience , mark , Hath given me this .
Good madam , stay a while .
I will be faithful .
O dear Ophelia , I am ill at these numbers .
I have not art to reckon my groans , but that I love thee best , oh , most best , believe it .
Adieu .
Hamlet." This in obedience hath my daughter shown me , And more above , hath his solicitings , As they fell out by time , by means , and place , All given to mine ear .
But how hath she received his love ?
What do you think of me ?
As of a man faithful and honorable .
I would fain prove so .
What might you think ?
No , I went round to work , And my young mistress thus I did bespeak : "Lord Hamlet is a prince out of thy star .
It may be , very like .
Hath there been such a time , I would fain know that , That I have positively said , "'Tis so , " When it proved otherwise ?
Not that I know .
How may we try it further ?
You know sometimes he walks four hours together Here in the lobby .
So he does indeed .
At such a time I'll loose my daughter to him .
Away , I do beseech you , both away .
I'll board him presently .
O , give me leave .
How does my good Lord Hamlet ?
Well , God-'a'-mercy .
Do you know me , my lord ?
The town is beseeched , and the trumpet call us to the breach , and we talk and , be Chrish , do nothing , 'tis shame for us all .
So God sa ' me , 'tis shame to stand still .
By the mess , ere theise eyes of mine take themselves to slomber , ay'll de gud service , or I'll lig i ' th ' grund for it , ay , or go to death .
Captain Macmorris , I think , look you , under your correction , there is not many of your nation , Of my nation ?
What ish my nation ?
Ish a villain and a basterd and a knave and a rascal .
What ish my nation ?
Who talks of my nation ?
Look you , if you take the matter otherwise than is meant , Captain Macmorris , peradventure I shall think you do not use me with that affability as , in discretion , you ought to use me , look you , being as good a man as yourself , both in the disciplines of war and in the derivation of my birth and in other particularities .
I do not know you so good a man as myself .
So Chrish save me , I will cut off your head .
Gentlemen both , you will mistake each other .
Ah , that's a foul fault .
The town sounds a parley .
Captain Macmorris , when there is more better opportunity to be required , look you , I will be so bold as to tell you I know the disciplines of war , and there is an end .
How yet resolves the governor of the town ?
This is the latest parle we will admit .
Therefore to our best mercy give yourselves Or , like to men proud of destruction , Defy us to our worst .
For , as I am a soldier , A name that in my thoughts becomes me best , If I begin the batt'ry once again , I will not leave the half-achieved Harfleur Till in her ashes she lie buried .
The gates of mercy shall be all shut up , And the fleshed soldier , rough and hard of heart , In liberty of bloody hand , shall range With conscience wide as hell , mowing like grass Your fresh fair virgins and your flow'ring infants .
What rein can hold licentious wickedness When down the hill he holds his fierce career ?
We may as bootless spend our vain command Upon th ' enraged soldiers in their spoil As send precepts to the Leviathan To come ashore .
What say you ?
Will you yield and this avoid Or , guilty in defense , be thus destroyed ?
Our expectation hath this day an end .
The Dauphin , whom of succors we entreated , Returns us that his powers are yet not ready To raise so great a siege .
Therefore , great King , We yield our town and lives to thy soft mercy .
Open your gates .
Come , uncle Exeter , Go you and enter Harfleur .
There remain And fortify it strongly 'gainst the French .
Tonight in Harfleur will we be your guest ; Tomorrow for the march are we addressed .
It must be so , for miracles are ceased , And therefore we must needs admit the means How things are perfected .
Doth his Majesty Incline to it or no ?
D'elbow." "D'elbow , " "De nick , " "De nick." "De chin." "De sin."
Tis certain he hath passed the river Somme .
An if he be not fought withal , my lord , Let us not live in France .
Let us quit all And give our vineyards to a barbarous people .
Normans , but bastard Normans , Norman bastards !
Unfought withal , but I will sell my dukedom To buy a slobb'ry and a dirty farm In that nook-shotten isle of Albion .
Is not their climate foggy , raw , and dull , On whom , as in despite , the sun looks pale , Killing their fruit with frowns ?
And shall our quick blood , spirited with wine , Seem frosty ?
Where is Montjoy the herald ?
Speed him hence .
Let him greet England with our sharp defiance .
Up , princes , and , with spirit of honor edged More sharper than your swords , hie to the field : Charles Delabreth , High Constable of France ; You dukes of Orleans , Bourbon , and of Berri , Alencon , Brabant , Bar , and Burgundy ; Jacques Chatillon , Rambures , Vaudemont , Beaumont , Grandpre , Roussi , and Faulconbridge , Foix , Lestrale , Bouciqualt , and Charolois ; High dukes , great princes , barons , lords , and knights , For your great seats now quit you of great shames .
Bar Harry England , that sweeps through our land With pennons painted in the blood of Harfleur .
Therefore , Lord Constable , haste on Montjoy And let him say to England that we send To know what willing ransom he will give .
Prince Dauphin , you shall stay with us in Rouen .
Not so , I do beseech your Majesty .
Be patient , for you shall remain with us .
Now forth , Lord Constable and princes all , And quickly bring us word of England's fall .
Is the duke of Exeter safe ?
He is called Aunchient Pistol .
I know him not .
Here is the man .
Captain , I thee beseech to do me favors .
The duke of Exeter doth love thee well .
Ay , I praise God , and I have merited some love at his hands .
Fortune is an excellent moral .
A damned death !
Aunchient Pistol , I do partly understand your meaning .
Die and be damned , and It is well .
Why , this is an arrant counterfeit rascal .
I'll assure you , he uttered as prave words at the pridge as you shall see in a summer's day .
trick up with new-tuned oaths ; and what a beard of the general's cut and a horrid suit of the camp will do among foaming bottles and ale-washed wits is wonderful to be thought on .
But you must learn to know such slanders of the age , or else you may be marvelously mistook .
If I find a hole in his coat , I will tell him my mind .
How now , Fluellen , cam'st thou from the bridge ?
Ay , so please your Majesty .
The duke of Exeter has very gallantly maintained the pridge .
The French is gone off , look you , and there is gallant and most prave passages .
Marry , th ' athversary was have possession of the pridge , but he is enforced to retire , and the duke of Exeter is master of the pridge .
I can tell your Majesty , the duke is a prave man .
What men have you lost , Fluellen ?
The perdition of th ' athversary hath been very great , reasonable great .
Marry , for my part , I think the duke hath lost never a man , but one that is like to be executed for robbing a church , one Bardolph , if your Majesty know the man .
We would have all such offenders so cut off , and we give express charge that in our marches through the country there be nothing compelled from the villages , nothing taken but paid for , none of the French upbraided or abused in disdainful language ; for when lenity and cruelty play for a kingdom , the gentler gamester is the soonest winner .
You know me by my habit .
Well then , I know thee .
What shall I know of thee ?
My master's mind .
Unfold it .
Thus says my king : "Say thou to Harry of England , though we seemed dead , we did but sleep .
Advantage is a better soldier than rashness .
Tell him we could have rebuked him at Harfleur , but that we thought not good to bruise an injury till it were full ripe .
Now we speak upon our cue , and our voice is imperial .
With good acceptance of his Majesty , Save that there was not time enough to hear , As I perceived his Grace would fain have done , The severals and unhidden passages Of his true titles to some certain dukedoms , And generally to the crown and seat of France , Derived from Edward , his great-grandfather .
What was th ' impediment that broke this off ?
The French ambassador upon that instant Craved audience .
And the hour , I think , is come To give him hearing .
Is it four o'clock ?
It is .
Then go we in to know his embassy , Which I could with a ready guess declare Before the Frenchman speak a word of it .
Bid him therefore consider of his ransom , which must proportion the losses we have borne , the subjects we have lost , the disgrace we have digested , which , in weight to reanswer , his pettiness would bow under .
For our losses , his exchequer is too poor ; for th ' effusion of our blood , the muster of his kingdom too faint a number ; and for our disgrace , his own person , kneeling at our feet but a weak and worthless satisfaction .
To this , add defiance , and tell him , for conclusion , he hath betrayed his followers , whose condemnation is pronounced." So far my king and master ; so much my office .
What is thy name ?
I know thy quality .
Montjoy .
Thou dost thy office fairly .
Turn thee back , And tell thy king I do not seek him now But could be willing to march on to Calais Without impeachment , for , to say the sooth , Though 'tis no wisdom to confess so much Unto an enemy of craft and vantage , My people are with sickness much enfeebled , My numbers lessened , and those few I have Almost no better than so many French , Who when they were in health , I tell thee , herald , I thought upon one pair of English legs Did march three Frenchmen .
Yet , forgive me , God , That I do brag thus .
Go therefore , tell thy master : here I am .
I shall deliver so .
Thanks to your Highness .
I hope they will not come upon us now .
We are in God's hand , brother , not in theirs .
March to the bridge .
It now draws toward night .
Tut , I have the best armor of the world .
Would it were day !
You have an excellent armor , but let my horse have his due .
It is the best horse of Europe .
Will it never be morning ?
My lord of Orleans , and my Lord High Constable , you talk of horse and armor ?
You are as well provided of both as any prince in the world .
What a long night is this !
I will not change my horse with any that treads but on four pasterns .
He bounds from the earth , as if his entrails were hairs , le cheval volant , the Pegasus , qui a les narines de feu .
The earth sings when he touches it .
The basest horn of his hoof is more musical than the pipe of Hermes .
He's of the color of the nutmeg .
And of the heat of the ginger .
It is a beast for Perseus .
He is indeed a horse , and all other jades you may call beasts .
Indeed , my lord , it is a most absolute and excellent horse .
It is the prince of palfreys .
His neigh is like the bidding of a monarch , and his countenance enforces homage .
No more , cousin .
Nay , the man hath no wit that can not , from the rising of the lark to the lodging of the lamb , vary deserved praise on my palfrey .
It is a theme as fluent as the sea .
Turn the sands into eloquent tongues , and my horse is argument for them all .
Tis a subject for a sovereign to reason on , and for a sovereign's sovereign to ride on , and for the world , familiar to us and unknown , to lay apart their particular functions and wonder at him .
I once writ a sonnet in his praise and began thus : "Wonder of nature , " I have heard a sonnet begin so to one's mistress .
Then did they imitate that which I composed to my courser , for my horse is my mistress .
Your mistress bears well .
So perhaps did yours .
Mine was not bridled .
Oh , then belike she was old and gentle , and you rode , like a kern of Ireland , your French hose off and in your straight strossers .
You have good judgment in horsemanship .
Be warned by me , then : they that ride so , and ride not warily , fall into foul bogs .
I had rather have my horse to my mistress .
I had as lief have my mistress a jade .
I tell thee , Constable , my mistress wears his own hair .
I could make as true a boast as that if I had a sow to my mistress .
Le chien est retourne a son propre vomissement , et la truie lavee au bourbier." Thou mak'st use of anything .
Yet do I not use my horse for my mistress , or any such proverb so little kin to the purpose .
My Lord Constable , the armor that I saw in your tent tonight , are those stars or suns upon it ?
Stars , my lord .
Some of them will fall tomorrow , I hope .
And yet my sky shall not want .
That may be , for you bear a many superfluously , and 'twere more honor some were away .
Ev'n as your horse bears your praises , who would trot as well were some of your brags dismounted .
Would I were able to load him with his desert !
Will it never be day ?
I will not say so , for fear I should be faced out of my way .
Tis midnight .
I'll go arm myself .
The Dauphin longs for morning .
He longs to eat the English .
Swear by her foot , that she may tread out the oath .
He is simply the most active gentleman of France .
Doing is activity , and he will still be doing .
He never did harm that I heard of .
Nor will do none tomorrow .
He will keep that good name still .
I know him to be valiant .
I was told that by one that knows him better than you .
What's he ?
Marry , he told me so himself ; and he said he cared not who knew it .
He needs not .
It is no hidden virtue in him .
Tis a hooded valor , and when it appears , it will bate .
Ill will never said well .
Have at the very eye of that proverb with "A pox of the devil." You are the better at proverbs , by how much "A fool's bolt is soon shot." You have shot over .
Tis not the first time you were overshot .
My Lord High Constable , the English lie within fifteen hundred paces of your tents .
Who hath measured the ground ?
The Lord Grandpre .
Alas , poor Harry of England !
He longs not for the dawning as we do .
What a wretched and peevish fellow is this king of England to mope with his fat-brained followers so far out of his knowledge .
If the English had any apprehension , they would run away .
That they lack , for if their heads had any intellectual armor , they could never wear such heavy head-pieces .
That island of England breeds very valiant creatures .
Their mastiffs are of unmatchable courage .
Foolish curs , that run winking into the mouth of a Russian bear and have their heads crushed like rotten apples .
You may as well say , that's a valiant flea that dare eat his breakfast on the lip of a lion .
Just , just ; and the men do sympathize with the mastiffs in robustious and rough coming on , leaving their wits with their wives .
And then give them great meals of beef and iron and steel , they will eat like wolves and fight like devils .
Ay , but these English are shrewdly out of beef .
Then shall we find tomorrow they have only stomachs to eat and none to fight .
Now is it time to arm .
Come , shall we about it ?
It is now two o'clock .
But , let me see , by ten We shall have each a hundred Englishmen .
Now entertain conjecture of a time When creeping murmur and the poring dark Fills the wide vessel of the universe .
Oh , now , who will behold The royal captain of this ruined band
Where is my gracious lord of Canterbury ?
Not here in presence .
Send for him , good uncle .
Shall we call in th ' ambassador , my liege ?
Not yet , my cousin .
We would be resolved , Before we hear him , of some things of weight That task our thoughts concerning us and France .
God and his angels guard your sacred throne And make you long become it .
Sure we thank you .
My learned lord , we pray you to proceed And justly and religiously unfold Why the law Salic that they have in France Or should or should not bar us in our claim .
And God forbid , my dear and faithful lord , That you should fashion , wrest , or bow your reading , Or nicely charge your understanding soul With opening titles miscreate , whose right Suits not in native colors with the truth ; For God doth know how many now in health Shall drop their blood in approbation
Let him cry , "Praise and glory on his head ! " For forth he goes and visits all his host , Bids them good morrow with a modest smile , And calls them brothers , friends , and countrymen .
Upon his royal face there is no note How dread an army hath enrounded him , Nor doth he dedicate one jot of color Unto the weary and all-watched night , But freshly looks and overbears attaint With cheerful semblance and sweet majesty , That every wretch , pining and pale before , Beholding him , plucks comfort from his looks .
Gloucester , 'tis true that we are in great danger .
The greater therefore should our courage be .
Good morrow , brother Bedford .
God almighty , There is some soul of goodness in things evil , Would men observingly distill it out .
For our bad neighbor makes us early stirrers , Which is both healthful and good husbandry .
Besides , they are our outward consciences And preachers to us all , admonishing That we should dress us fairly for our end .
Thus may we gather honey from the weed And make a moral of the devil himself .
Good morrow , old Sir Thomas Erpingham .
A good soft pillow for that good white head Were better than a churlish turf of France .
So the spirit is eased .
And when the mind is quickened , out of doubt , The organs , though defunct and dead before , Break up their drowsy grave and newly move , With casted slough and fresh legerity .
Lend me thy cloak , Sir Thomas .
We shall , my liege .
Shall I attend your Grace ?
No , my good knight .
Go with my brothers to my lords of England .
I and my bosom must debate awhile , And then I would no other company .
The Lord in heaven bless thee , noble Harry !
A friend .
Discuss unto me : art thou officer or art thou base , common , and popular ?
I am a gentleman of a company .
Trail'st thou the puissant pike ?
Even so .
What are you ?
As good a gentleman as the emperor .
Then you are a better than the king .
The king's a bawcock , and a heart of gold , A lad of life , an imp of fame , Of parents good , of fist most valiant .
I kiss his dirty shoe , and from heartstring I love the lovely bully .
What is thy name ?
Harry le Roy .
Le Roy ?
A Cornish name .
Art thou of Cornish crew ?
No , I am a Welshman .
Know'st thou Fluellen ?
Yes .
Tell him I'll knock his leek about his pate Upon Saint Davy's day .
Do not you wear your dagger in your cap that day , lest he knock that about yours .
Art thou his friend ?
And his kinsman too .
The I thank you .
God be with you .
My name is Pistol called .
It sorts well with your fierceness .
Captain Fluellen .
It is the greatest admiration in the universal world when the true and aunchient prerogatifes and laws of the wars is not kept .
If you would take the pains but to examine the wars of Pompey the Great , you shall find , I warrant you , that there is no tiddle toddle nor pibble babble in Pompey's camp .
I warrant you , you shall find the ceremonies of the wars and the cares of it and the forms of it and the sobriety of it and the modesty of it to be otherwise .
Why , the enemy is loud .
You hear him all night .
If the enemy is an ass and a fool and a prating coxcomb , is it meet , think you , that we should also , look you , be an ass and a fool and a prating coxcomb , in your own conscience , now ?
I will speak lower .
I pray you and beseech you that you will .
Though it appear a little out of fashion , There is much care and valor in this Welshman .
Brother John Bates , is not that the morning which breaks yonder ?
We see yonder the beginning of the day , but I think we shall never see the end of it. , Who goes there ?
A friend .
Under what captain serve you ?
Under Sir Thomas Erpingham .
A good old commander and a most kind gentleman .
I pray you , what thinks he of our estate ?
Even as men wracked upon a sand , that look to be washed off the next tide .
He hath not told his thought to the king ?
The violet smells to him as it doth to me .
His ceremonies laid by , in his nakedness he appears but a man , and though his affections are higher mounted than ours , yet when they stoop , they stoop with the like wing .
Therefore , when he sees reason of fears as we do , his fears , out of doubt , be of the same relish as ours are .
Yet , in reason , no man should possess him with any appearance of fear , lest he , by showing it , should dishearten his army .
He may show what outward courage he will , but I believe , as cold a night as 'tis , he could wish himself in Thames up to the neck ; and so I would he were , and I by him , at all adventures , so we were quit here .
By my troth , I will speak my conscience of the king .
I think he would not wish himself anywhere but where he is .
I dare say you love him not so ill to wish him here alone , howsoever you speak this to feel other men's minds .
Methinks I could not die anywhere so contented as in the king's company , his cause being just and his quarrel honorable .
That's more than we know .
If his cause be wrong , our obedience to the king wipes the crime of it out of us .
But if the cause be not good , the king himself hath a heavy reckoning to make , when all those legs and arms and heads , chopped off in a battle , shall join together at the latter day , and cry all , "We died at such a place , " some swearing , some crying for a surgeon , some upon their wives left poor behind them , some upon the debts they owe , some upon their children rawly left .
I am afeard there are few die well that die in a battle , for how can they charitably dispose of anything , when blood is their argument ?
The king is not bound to answer the particular endings of his soldiers , the father of his son , nor the master of his servant , for they purpose not their death , when they purpose their services .
Besides , there is no king , be his cause never so spotless , if it come to the arbitrament of swords , can try it out with all unspotted soldiers .
Now , if these men have defeated the law and outrun native punishment , though they can outstrip men , they have no wings to fly from God .
Where they feared the death , they have borne life away ; and where they would be safe , they perish .
Then , if they die unprovided , no more is the king guilty of their damnation than he was before guilty of those impieties for the which they are now visited .
Every subject's duty is the king's , but every subject's soul is his own .
Therefore should every soldier in the wars do as every sick man in his bed : wash every mote out of his conscience .
And , dying so , death is to him advantage ; or not dying , the time was blessedly lost wherein such preparation was gained .
Tis certain , every man that dies ill , the ill upon his own head .
The king is not to answer it .
I do not desire he should answer for me , and yet I determine to fight lustily for him .
I myself heard the king say he would not be ransomed .
If I live to see it , I will never trust his word after .
You pay him then .
That's a perilous shot out of an elder gun , that a poor and private displeasure can do against a monarch .
You may as well go about to turn the sun to ice with fanning in his face with a peacock's feather .
You'll "never trust his word after." Come , 'tis a foolish saying .
Your reproof is something too round .
I should be angry with you if the time were convenient .
Let it be a quarrel between us , if you live .
I embrace it .
How shall I know thee again ?
Give me any gage of thine , and I will wear it in my bonnet .
Then , if ever thou dar'st acknowledge it , I will make it my quarrel .
There .
This will I also wear in my cap .
If ever thou come to me and say , after tomorrow , "This is my glove , " by this hand I will take thee a box on the ear .
If ever I live to see it , I will challenge it .
Thou dar'st as well be hanged .
Well , I will do it , though I take thee in the king's company .
Keep thy word .
Fare thee well .
Indeed , the French may lay twenty French crowns to one they will beat us , for they bear them on their shoulders .
But it is no English treason to cut French crowns , and tomorrow the king himself will be a clipper .
Of what your reverence shall incite us to .
Therefore take heed how you impawn our person , How you awake our sleeping sword of war .
Under this conjuration , speak , my lord , For we will hear , note , and believe in heart That what you speak is in your conscience washed As pure as sin with baptism .
Then hear me , gracious sovereign , and you peers That owe yourselves , your lives , and services To this imperial throne .
Upon the king !
Let us our lives , our souls , our debts , our careful wives , our children , and our sins lay on the king !
We must bear all .
O hard condition , Twin-born with greatness , subject to the breath Of every fool , whose sense no more can feel But his own wringing .
What infinite heart's ease Must kings neglect that private men enjoy ?
And what have kings that privates have not too , Save ceremony , save general ceremony ?
And what art thou , thou idol ceremony ?
What kind of god art thou , that suffer'st more Of mortal griefs than do thy worshippers ?
What are thy comings in ?
O ceremony , show me but thy worth !
What is thy soul of adoration ?
Art thou aught else but place , degree , and form , Creating awe and fear in other men , Wherein thou art less happy , being feared , Than they in fearing ?
What drink'st thou oft , instead of homage sweet , But poisoned flattery ?
Oh , be sick , great greatness , And bid thy ceremony give thee cure !
Think'st thou the fiery fever will go out With titles blown from adulation ?
Will it give place to flexure and low bending ?
Canst thou , when thou command'st the beggar's knee , Command the health of it ?
No , thou proud dream , That play'st so subtly with a king's repose .
And , but for ceremony , such a wretch , Winding up days with toil and nights with sleep , Had the forehand and vantage of a king .
My lord , your nobles , jealous of your absence , Seek through your camp to find you .
Good old knight , Collect them all together at my tent .
I'll be before thee .
I shall do't , my lord .
O God of battles , steel my soldiers ' hearts .
Possess them not with fear .
Take from them now The sense of reck'ning ere th ' opposed numbers Pluck their hearts from them .
Not today , O Lord , Oh , not today , think not upon the fault My father made in compassing the crown .
I Richard's body have interred anew , And on it have bestowed more contrite tears Than from it issued forced drops of blood .
Five hundred poor I have in yearly pay , Who twice a day their withered hands hold up Toward heaven to pardon blood .
And I have built Two chantries where the sad and solemn priests Sing still for Richard's soul .
More will I do , Though all that I can do is nothing worth , Since that my penitence comes after all , Imploring pardon .
My liege .
My brother Gloucester's voice. , Ay , I know thy errand .
I will go with thee .
The day , my friends , and all things stay for me .
The sun doth gild our armor .
Up , my lords .
Now , my Lord Constable ?
Hark how our steeds for present service neigh .
Ha !
What , will you have them weep our horses ' blood ?
How shall we then behold their natural tears ?
The English are embattled , you French peers .
To horse , you gallant princes , straight to horse .
What's to say ?
Then let the trumpets sound The tucket sonance and the note to mount , For our approach shall so much dare the field That England shall couch down in fear and yield .
Why do you stay so long , my lords of France ?
Yond island carrions , desperate of their bones , Ill-favoredly become the morning field .
Big Mars seems bankrupt in their beggared host And faintly through a rusty beaver peeps .
They have said their prayers , and they stay for death .
Shall we go send them dinners and fresh suits , And give their fasting horses provender , And after fight with them ?
On , to the field !
I will the banner from a trumpet take And use it for my haste .
Come , come away .
The sun is high , and we outwear the day .
Where is the king ?
The king himself is rode to view their battle .
Of fighting men they have full threescore thousand .
There's five to one .
Besides , they all are fresh .
God's arm strike with us !
Tis a fearful odds .
God be wi ' you , princes all .
I'll to my charge .
Farewell , good Salisbury , and good luck go with thee .
Farewell , kind lord .
Fight valiantly today .
And yet I do thee wrong to mind thee of it , For thou art framed of the firm truth of valor .
He is as full of valor as of kindness , Princely in both .
Oh , that we now had here But one ten thousand of those men in England That do no work today .
What's he that wishes so ?
My cousin Westmoreland ?
No , my fair cousin .
If we are marked to die , we are enough To do our country loss ; and if to live , The fewer men , the greater share of honor .
God's will , I pray thee wish not one man more .
By Jove , I am not covetous for gold Nor care I who doth feed upon my cost ; It yearns me not if men my garments wear ; Such outward things dwell not in my desires .
But if it be a sin to covet honor , I am the most offending soul alive .
No , faith , my coz , wish not a man from England .
God's peace , I would not lose so great an honor As one man more , methinks , would share from me , For the best hope I have .
Oh , do not wish one more !
His passport shall be made , And crowns for convoy put into his purse .
We would not die in that man's company That fears his fellowship to die with us .
He that shall see this day , and live old age , Will yearly on the vigil feast his neighbors And say , "Tomorrow is Saint Crispian." Then will he strip his sleeve and show his scars , And say , "These wounds I had on Crispin's day."
All things are ready if our minds be so .
Perish the man whose mind is backward now !
Thou dost not wish more help from England , coz ?
God be with you all .
Tucket Once more I come to know of thee , King Harry , If for thy ransom thou wilt now compound , Before thy most assured overthrow .
For certainly thou art so near the gulf Thou needs must be englutted .
Besides , in mercy , The constable desires thee thou wilt mind Thy followers of repentance , that their souls May make a peaceful and a sweet retire From off these fields where , wretches , their poor bodies Must lie and fester .
Who hath sent thee now ?
The constable of France .
I pray thee , bear my former answer back .
Bid them achieve me and then sell my bones .
The man that once did sell the lion's skin While the beast lived was killed with hunting him .
A many of our bodies shall no doubt Find native graves , upon the which , I trust , Shall witness live in brass of this day's work .
And those that leave their valiant bones in France , Dying like men though buried in your dunghills , They shall be famed ; for there the sun shall greet them And draw their honors reeking up to heaven , Leaving their earthly parts to choke your clime ,
Besides , their writers say , King Pepin , which deposed Childeric , Did , as heir general , being descended Of Blithild , which was daughter to King Clothair , Make claim and title to the crown of France .
Hugh Capet also , who usurped the crown Of Charles the duke of Lorraine , sole heir male Of the true line and stock of Charles the Great , To find his title with some shows of truth , Though in pure truth it was corrupt and naught , Conveyed himself as th ' heir to th ' Lady Lingare , Daughter to Charlemagne , who was the son To Lewis the Emperor , and Lewis the son Of Charles the Great .
Also King Lewis the Tenth , Who was sole heir to the usurper Capet , Could not keep quiet in his conscience , Wearing the crown of France , till satisfied That fair Queen Isabel , his grandmother , Was lineal of the Lady Ermengare , Daughter to Charles the foresaid duke of Lorraine , By the which marriage the line of Charles the Great Was reunited to the crown of France .
So that , as clear as is the summer's sun , King Pepin's title and Hugh Capet's claim , King Lewis his satisfaction , all appear To hold in right and title of the female .
Let me speak proudly : tell the constable We are but warriors for the working day ; Our gayness and our gilt are all besmirched With rainy marching in the painful field .
There's not a piece of feather in our host , Good argument , I hope , we will not fly , And time hath worn us into slovenry .
If they do this , As , if God please , they shall , my ransom then Will soon be levied .
Herald , save thou thy labor .
Come thou no more for ransom , gentle herald .
They shall have none , I swear , but these my joints , Which , if they have , as I will leave 'em them , Shall yield them little .
Tell the constable .
I shall , King Harry .
And so fare thee well .
Thou never shalt hear herald anymore .
I fear thou wilt once more come again for a ransom .
My lord , most humbly on my knee I beg The leading of the vaward .
Take it , brave York .
Now , soldiers , march away , And how Thou pleasest , God , dispose the day .
Yield , cur .
He says his name is Master Fer .
Master Fer .
What are his words ?
He prays you to save his life .
He is a gentleman of a good house , and for his ransom he will give you two hundred crowns .
Tell him my fury shall abate , and I the crowns will take .
Expound unto me , boy .
He gives you upon his knees a thousand thanks , and he esteems himself happy that he hath fall'n into the hands of one , as he thinks , the most brave , valorous , and thrice- worthy seigneur of England .
As I suck blood , I will some mercy show .
Follow me .
I did never know so full a voice issue from so empty a heart .
I must stay with the lackeys with the luggage of our camp .
The French might have a good prey of us if he knew of it , for there is none to guard it but boys .
Reproach and everlasting shame Sits mocking in our plumes .
Do not run away .
Why , all our ranks are broke .
O perdurable shame !
Let's stab ourselves .
Be these the wretches that we played at dice for ?
Is this the king we sent to for his ransom ?
Shame , and eternal shame , nothing but shame !
Let us die .
And he that will not follow Bourbon now , Let him go hence , and with his cap in hand Like a base pander hold the chamber door , Whilst by a slave , no gentler than my dog , His fairest daughter is contaminate .
Disorder , that hath spoiled us , friend us now .
Let us on heaps go offer up our lives .
We are enough yet living in the field To smother up the English in our throngs , If any order might be thought upon .
The devil take order now !
I'll to the throng .
Let life be short , else shame will be too long .
Yet keep the French the field .
The duke of York commends him to your Majesty .
Lives he , good uncle ?
Thrice within this hour I saw him down , thrice up again and fighting .
From helmet to the spur , all blood he was .
In which array , brave soldier , doth he lie , Larding the plain , and by his bloody side , Yoke-fellow to his honor-owing wounds , The noble earl of Suffolk also lies .
Suffolk first died , and York , all haggled over , Comes to him where in gore he lay insteeped And takes him by the beard , kisses the gashes That bloodily did yawn upon his face .
And cries aloud , "Tarry , my cousin Suffolk .
My soul shall thine keep company to heaven .
Tarry , sweet soul , for mine ; then fly abreast , As in this glorious and well-foughten field We kept together in our chivalry." Upon these words I came and cheered him up .
The French have reinforced their scattered men .
Then every soldier kill his prisoners .
Give the word through .
So do the kings of France unto this day , Howbeit they would hold up this Salic law To bar your Highness claiming from the female And rather choose to hide them in a net Than amply to imbar their crooked titles Usurped from you and your progenitors .
May I with right and conscience make this claim ?
The sin upon my head , dread sovereign , For in the Book of Numbers is it writ : "When the man dies , let the inheritance Descend unto the daughter." Gracious lord , Stand for your own , unwind your bloody flag , Look back into your mighty ancestors .
Go , my dread lord , to your great-grandsire's tomb , From whom you claim .
Invoke his warlike spirit And your great-uncle's , Edward the Black Prince , Who on the French ground played a tragedy , Making defeat on the full power of France Whiles his most mighty father on a hill Stood smiling to behold his lion's whelp Forage in blood of French nobility .
O noble English , that could entertain With half their forces the full pride of France And let another half stand laughing by , All out of work and cold for action !
Awake remembrance of these valiant dead And with your puissant arm renew their feats .
You are their heir , you sit upon their throne , The blood and courage that renowned them Runs in your veins ; and my thrice-puissant liege Is in the very May-morn of his youth , Ripe for exploits and mighty enterprises .
Kill the poys and the luggage !
Tis expressly against the law of arms .
Tis as arrant a piece of knavery , mark you now , as can be offert , in your conscience now , is it not ?
Tis certain there's not a boy left alive , and the cowardly rascals that ran from the battle ha ' done this slaughter .
Besides , they have burned and carried away all that was in the king's tent , wherefore the king , most worthily , hath caused every soldier to cut his prisoner's throat .
Oh , 'tis a gallant king !
Ay , he was porn at Monmouth , Captain Gower .
Why , I pray you , is not "pig" great ?
The pig , or the great , or the mighty , or the huge , or the magnanimous are all one reckonings , save the phrase is a little variations .
I think Alexander the Great was born in Macedon .
His father was called Philip of Macedon , as I take it .
I think it is in Macedon where Alexander is porn .
I tell you , Captain , if you look in the maps of the 'orld , I warrant you shall find , in the comparisons between Macedon and Monmouth , that the situations , look you , is both alike .
There is a river in Macedon , and there is also , moreover , a river at Monmouth .
It is called Wye at Monmouth , but it is out of my prains what is the name of the other river .
But 'tis all one ; 'tis alike as my fingers is to my fingers , and there is salmons in both .
If you mark Alexander's life well , Harry of Monmouth's life is come after it indifferent well , for there is figures in all things .
Alexander , God knows and you know , in his rages and his furies and his wraths and his cholers and his moods and his displeasures and his indignations , and also being a little intoxicates in his prains , did , in his ales and his angers , look you , kill his best friend , Cleitus .
It is not well done , mark you now , to take the tales out of my mouth ere it is made and finished .
I speak but in the figures and comparisons of it .
Sir John Falstaff .
That is he .
I'll tell you , there is good men porn at Monmouth .
Here comes his Majesty .
I was not angry since I came to France Until this instant .
Take a trumpet , herald .
Ride thou unto the horsemen on yond hill .
If they will fight with us , bid them come down , Or void the field .
They do offend our sight .
If they'll do neither , we will come to them And make them skirr away as swift as stones Enforced from the old Assyrian slings .
Go and tell them so .
Here comes the herald of the French , my liege .
His eyes are humbler than they used to be .
Know'st thou not That I have fined these bones of mine for ransom ?
Com'st thou again for ransom ?
No , great king .
I come to thee for charitable license , That we may wander o'er this bloody field To book our dead and then to bury them ; To sort our nobles from our common men , For many of our princes , woe the while ! , Lie drowned and soaked in mercenary blood .
So do our vulgar drench their peasant limbs In blood of princes , and the wounded steeds Fret fetlock deep in gore , and with wild rage Yerk out their armed heels at their dead masters , Killing them twice .
Oh , give us leave , great king , To view the field in safety and dispose Of their dead bodies .
The day is yours .
Praised be God , and not our strength , for it !
What is this castle called that stands hard by ?
They call it Agincourt .
Then call we this the field of Agincourt , Fought on the day of Crispin Crispianus .
Your grandfather of famous memory , an't please your Majesty , and your great-uncle Edward the Plack Prince of Wales , as I have read in the chronicles , fought a most prave pattle here in France .
They did , Fluellen .
Your Majesty says very true .
If your Majesties is remembered of it , the Welshmen did good service in a garden where leeks did grow , wearing leeks in their Monmouth caps , which , your Majesty know , to this hour is an honorable badge of the service .
And I do believe your Majesty takes no scorn to wear the leek upon Saint Tavy's day .
I wear it for a memorable honor , For I am Welsh , you know , good countryman .
Thanks , good my countryman .
By Jeshu , I am your Majesty's countryman , I care not who know it .
I will confess it to all the 'orld .
I need not to be ashamed of your Majesty , praised be God , so long as your Majesty is an honest man .
God keep me so. , Our heralds go with him .
Bring me just notice of the numbers dead On both our parts .
Soldier , you must come to the king .
Soldier , why wear'st thou that glove in thy cap ?
An't please your Majesty , 'tis the gage of one that I should fight withal , if he be alive .
An Englishman ?
He is a craven and a villain else , an 't please your Majesty , in my conscience .
It may be his enemy is a gentleman of great sort , quite from the answer of his degree .
Though he be as good a gentleman as the devil is , as Lucifer and Beelzebub himself , it is necessary , look your Grace , that he keep his vow and his oath .
If he be perjured , see you now , his reputation is as arrant a villain and a Jack Sauce as ever his black shoe trod upon God's ground and His earth , in my conscience , la .
Then keep thy vow , sirrah , when thou meet'st the fellow .
So I will , my liege , as I live .
Who serv'st thou under ?
Under Captain Gower , my liege .
Gower is a good captain , and is good knowledge and literatured in the wars .
Call him hither to me , soldier .
I will , my liege .
Here , Fluellen , wear thou this favor for me and stick it in thy cap .
Your Grace does me as great honors as can be desired in the hearts of his subjects .
Know'st thou Gower ?
He is my dear friend , an please you .
Pray thee , go seek him , and bring him to my tent .
I will fetch him .
My Lord of Warwick and my brother Gloucester , Follow Fluellen closely at the heels .
The glove which I have given him for a favor May haply purchase him a box o ' th ' ear .
I by bargain should Wear it myself .
Follow , and see there be no harm between them .
Go you with me , uncle of Exeter .
I warrant it is to knight you , Captain .
God's will and His pleasure , Captain , I beseech you now , come apace to the king .
Sir , know you this glove ?
Know the glove !
I know the glove is a glove .
I know this , and thus I challenge it .
Sblood , an arrant traitor as any 's in the universal world , or in France , or in England !
Do you think I'll be forsworn ?
Stand away , Captain Gower .
I will give treason his payment into plows , I warrant you .
I am no traitor .
He's a friend of the Duke Alencon's .
My Lord of Warwick , here is , praised be God for it , a most contagious treason come to light , look you , as you shall desire in a summer's day .
Here is his Majesty .
My liege , here is a villain and a traitor , that , look your Grace , has struck the glove which your Majesty is take out of the helmet of Alencon .
My liege , this was my glove ; here is the fellow of it .
I met this man with my glove in his cap , and I have been as good as my word .
Your Majesty , hear now , saving your Majesty's manhood , what an arrant , rascally , beggarly , lousy knave it is .
I hope your Majesty is pear me testimony and witness , and will avouchment that this is the glove of Alencon that your Majesty is give me , in your conscience now .
Twas I indeed thou promised'st to strike , And thou hast given me most bitter terms .
They know your Grace hath cause and means and might ; So hath your Highness .
Never king of England Had nobles richer , and more loyal subjects , Whose hearts have left their bodies here in England And lie pavilioned in the fields of France .
Oh , let their bodies follow , my dear liege , With blood and sword and fire to win your right , In aid whereof we of the spiritualty Will raise your Highness such a mighty sum As never did the clergy at one time Bring in to any of your ancestors .
We do not mean the coursing snatchers only , But fear the main intendment of the Scot , Who hath been still a giddy neighbor to us .
An please your Majesty , let his neck answer for it , if there is any martial law in the world .
How canst thou make me satisfaction ?
It was ourself thou didst abuse .
Your Majesty came not like yourself .
You appeared to me but as a common man .
And what your Highness suffered under that shape , I beseech you take it for your own fault and not mine , for , had you been as I took you for , I made no offense .
Therefore , I beseech your Highness pardon me .
I will none of your money .
It is with a good will .
I can tell you it will serve you to mend your shoes .
Come , wherefore should you be so pashful ?
Your shoes is not so good .
Tis a good silling , I warrant you , or I will change it .
Now , herald , are the dead numbered ?
Here is the number of the slaughtered French .
What prisoners of good sort are taken , uncle ?
This note doth tell me of ten thousand French That in the field lie slain .
Of princes in this number And nobles bearing banners , there lie dead One hundred twenty-six .
Added to these , Of knights , esquires , and gallant gentlemen , Eight thousand and four hundred , of the which , Five hundred were but yesterday dubbed knights .
So that in these ten thousand they have lost , There are but sixteen hundred mercenaries .
The rest are princes , barons , lords , knights , squires , And gentlemen of blood and quality .
Of lusty earls : Grandpre and Roussi , Faulconbridge and Foix , Beaumont and Marle , Vaudemont and Lestrale .
Where is the number of our English dead ?
When , without stratagem , But in plain shock and even play of battle , Was ever known so great and little loss On one part and on th ' other ?
Take it , God , For it is none but thine .
Tis wonderful .
Yes , Captain , but with this acknowledgement : That God fought for us .
Yes , my conscience , He did us great good .
Do we all holy rites .
Vouchsafe to those that have not read the story That I may prompt them ; and of such as have , I humbly pray them to admit th ' excuse Of time , of numbers , and due course of things , Which can not in their huge and proper life Be here presented .
So let him land , And solemnly see him set on to London .
So swift a pace hath thought that even now You may imagine him upon Blackheath , Where that his lords desire him to have borne His bruised helmet and his bended sword Before him through the city .
He forbids it , Being free from vainness and self-glorious pride , Giving full trophy , signal , and ostent Quite from himself , to God .
But now behold , In the quick forge and workinghouse of thought , How London doth pour out her citizens .
The Mayor and all his brethren in best sort , Like to the senators of th ' antique Rome , With the plebeians swarming at their heels , Go forth and fetch their conquering Caesar in , As , by a lower but loving likelihood ,
Then brook abridgment , and your eyes advance After your thoughts , straight back again to France .
Saint Davy's day is past .
There is occasions and causes why and wherefore in all things .
It was in place where I could not breed no contention with him , but I will be so bold as to wear it in my cap till I see him once again , and then I will tell him a little piece of my desires .
Why , here he comes , swelling like a turkey-cock .
Ha , art thou bedlam ?
Hence .
I am qualmish at the smell of leek .
I peseech you heartily , scurvy , lousy knave , at my desires , and my requests , and my petitions , to eat , look you , this leek .
Because , look you , you do not love it , nor your affections and your appetites and your digestions does not agree with it , I would desire you to eat it .
Not for Cadwallader and all his goats .
There is one goat for you .
Base Trojan , thou shalt die .
You say very true , scald knave , when God's will is .
I will desire you to live in the meantime and eat your victuals .
Come , there is sauce for it .
Enough , Captain .
You have astonished him .
I say I will make him eat some part of my leek , or I will peat his pate four days. , Bite , I pray you .
It is good for your green wound and your ploody coxcomb .
Must I bite ?
Yes , certainly , and out of doubt and out of question , too , and ambiguities .
By this leek , I will most horribly revenge .
Will you have some more sauce to your leek ?
There is not enough leek to swear by .
Quiet thy cudgel .
Thou dost see I eat .
Much good do you , scald knave , heartily .
Nay , pray you throw none away .
The skin is good for your broken coxcomb .
When you take occasions to see leeks hereafter , I pray you , mock at 'em , that is all .
Good .
Ay , leeks is good .
Hold you , there is a groat to heal your pate .
Me , a groat ?
If I owe you anything , I will pay you in cudgels .
You shall be a woodmonger and buy nothing of me but cudgels .
God be wi ' you and keep you and heal your pate .
All hell shall stir for this .
Go , go .
You are a counterfeit cowardly knave .
Will you mock at an ancient tradition begun upon an honorable respect and worn as a memorable trophy of predeceased valor , and dare not avouch in your deeds any of your words ?
I have seen you gleeking and galling at this gentleman twice or thrice .
You thought because he could not speak English in the native garb , he could not therefore handle an English cudgel .
Fare you well .
Doth Fortune play the huswife with me now ?
News have I that my Nell is dead i ' th ' spital Of a malady of France , And there my rendezvous is quite cut off .
Old I do wax , and from my weary limbs Honor is cudgeled .
Well , bawd I'll turn , And something lean to cutpurse of quick hand .
To England will I steal , and there I'll steal .
And patches will I get unto these cudgeled scars , And swear I got them in the Gallia wars .
But there's a saying very old and true : "If that you will France win , Then with Scotland first begin." For once the eagle England being in prey , To her unguarded nest the weasel Scot Comes sneaking and so sucks her princely eggs , Playing the mouse in absence of the cat , To 'tame and havoc more than she can eat .
It follows , then , the cat must stay at home .
Yet that is but a crushed necessity , Since we have locks to safeguard necessaries And pretty traps to catch the petty thieves .
While that the armed hand doth fight abroad , Th ' advised head defends itself at home .
Right joyous are we to behold your face , Most worthy brother England .
So are you , princes English , every one .
The venom of such looks , we fairly hope , Have lost their quality , and that this day Shall change all griefs and quarrels into love .
To cry "Amen" to that , thus we appear .
You English princes all , I do salute you .
My duty to you both , on equal love , Great kings of France and England .
That I have labored With all my wits , my pains , and strong endeavors , To bring your most imperial Majesties Unto this bar and royal interview , Your mightiness on both parts best can witness .
Alas , she hath from France too long been chased , And all her husbandry doth lie on heaps , Corrupting in its own fertility .
Her vine , the merry cheerer of the heart , Unpruned , dies .
Her hedges , even-pleached , Like prisoners wildly overgrown with hair , Put forth disordered twigs .
Her fallow leas The darnel , hemlock , and rank fumitory Doth root upon , while that the coulter rusts That should deracinate such savagery .
The even mead , that erst brought sweetly forth The freckled cowslip , burnet , and green clover , Wanting the scythe , withal uncorrected , rank , Conceives by idleness , and nothing teems But hateful docks , rough thistles , kecksies , burrs , Losing both beauty and utility .
And as our vineyards , fallows , meads , and hedges , Defective in their natures , grow to wildness , Even so our houses and ourselves and children Have lost , or do not learn for want of time , The sciences that should become our country , But grow like savages , as soldiers will
That nothing do but meditate on blood , To swearing and stern looks , diffused attire , And everything that seems unnatural .
If , Duke of Burgundy , you would the peace , Whose want gives growth to th ' imperfections Which you have cited , you must buy that peace With full accord to all our just demands , Whose tenors and particular effects You have , enscheduled briefly , in your hands .
The king hath heard them , to the which as yet There is no answer made .
Well then , the peace which you before so urged Lies in his answer .
I have but with a cursitory eye O'erglanced the articles .
Pleaseth your Grace To appoint some of your council presently To sit with us once more with better heed To resurvey them , we will suddenly Pass our accept and peremptory answer .
And we'll consign thereto. , Will you , fair sister , Go with the princes or stay here with us ?
Our gracious brother , I will go with them .
Haply a woman's voice may do some good , When articles too nicely urged be stood on .
Yet leave our cousin Katherine here with us .
She is our capital demand , comprised Within the forerank of our articles .
She hath good leave .
Fair Katherine , and most fair , Will you vouchsafe to teach a soldier terms Such as will enter at a lady's ear And plead his love suit to her gentle heart ?
Your Majesty shall mock at me .
I can not speak your England .
O fair Katherine , if you will love me soundly with your French heart , I will be glad to hear you confess it brokenly with your English tongue .
Do you like me , Kate ?
An angel is like you , Kate , and you are like an angel .
I said so , dear Katherine ; and I must not blush to affirm it .
The princess is the better Englishwoman. , I ' faith , Kate , my wooing is fit for thy understanding .
I am glad thou canst speak no better English , for if thou couldst , thou wouldst find me such a plain king that thou wouldst think I had sold my farm to buy my crown .
I know no ways to mince it in love , but directly to say , "I love you." Then if you urge me farther than to say , "Do you , in faith ? " I wear out my suit .
Give me your answer , i ' faith , do ; and so clap hands and a bargain .
How say you , lady ?
For the one , I have neither words nor measure ; and for the other , I have no strength in measure , yet a reasonable measure in strength .
If I could win a lady at leapfrog or by vaulting into my saddle with my armor on my back , under the correction of bragging be it spoken , I should quickly leap into a wife .
If thou canst love a fellow of this temper , Kate , whose face is not worth sunburning , that never looks in his glass for love of anything he sees there , let thine eye be thy cook .
I speak to thee plain soldier .
If thou canst love me for this , take me .
If not , to say to thee that I shall die is true , but for thy love , by the Lord , no .
Yet I love thee too .
And while thou liv'st , dear Kate , take a fellow of plain and uncoined constancy , for he perforce must do thee right because he hath not the gift to woo in other places .
For these fellows of infinite tongue , that can rhyme themselves into ladies ' favors , they do always reason themselves out again .
If thou would have such a one , take me .
And what say'st thou then to my love ?
Speak , my fair , and fairly , I pray thee .
Is it possible dat I sould love de enemy of France ?
No , it is not possible you should love the enemy of France , Kate .
But , in loving me , you should love the friend of France , for I love France so well that I will not part with a village of it .
I will have it all mine .
And , Kate , when France is mine and I am yours , then yours is France and you are mine .
I can not tell wat is dat .
No , Kate ?
Can any of your neighbors tell , Kate ?
I'll ask them .
But , good Kate , mock me mercifully , the rather , gentle princess , because I love thee cruelly .
Shall we not ?
What say'st thou , my fair flower de luce ?
I do not know dat .
No , 'tis hereafter to know , but now to promise .
Do but now promise , Kate , you will endeavor for your French part of such a boy ; and for my English moiety take the word of a king and a bachelor .
By mine honor , in true English , I love thee , Kate .
By which honor I dare not swear thou lovest me , yet my blood begins to flatter me that thou dost , notwithstanding the poor and untempering effect of my visage .
Now , beshrew my father's ambition !
But , in faith , Kate , the elder I wax , the better I shall appear .
My comfort is that old age , that ill layer-up of beauty , can do no more spoil upon my face .
Thou hast me , if thou hast me , at the worst , and thou shalt wear me , if thou wear me , better and better .
And therefore tell me , most fair Katherine , will you have me ?
Put off your maiden blushes , avouch the thoughts of your heart with the looks of an empress , take me by the hand , and say "Harry of England , I am thine , " which word thou shalt no sooner bless mine ear withal , but I will tell
thee aloud "England is thine , Ireland is thine , France is thine , and Harry Plantagenet is thine , " who , though I speak it before his face , if he be not fellow with the best king , thou shalt find the best king of good fellows .
Come , your answer in broken music , for thy voice is music and thy English broken .
Therefore , queen of all , Katherine , break thy mind to me in broken English .
Wilt thou have me ?
Den it sall also content me .
Upon that I kiss your hand , and I call you my queen .
Then I will kiss your lips , Kate .
Madam my interpreter , what says she ?
Dat it is not be de fashion pour les ladies of France , I can not tell wat is To kiss .
Your It is not a fashion for the maids in France to kiss before they are married , would she say ?
O Kate , nice customs curtsy to great kings .
Dear Kate , you and I can not be confined within the weak list of a country's fashion .
We are the makers of manners , Kate , and the liberty that follows our places stops the mouth of all find- faults , as I will do yours for upholding the nice fashion of your country in denying me a kiss .
Therefore , patiently and yielding .
God save your Majesty .
My royal cousin , teach you our princess English ?
I would have her learn , my fair cousin , how perfectly I love her , and that is good English .
Is she not apt ?
Our tongue is rough , coz , and my condition is not smooth , so that , having neither the voice nor the heart of flattery about me , I can not so conjure up the spirit of love in her that he will appear in his true likeness .
I this infer : That many things , having full reference To one consent , may work contrariously , As many arrows loosed several ways Come to one mark , as many ways meet in one town , As many fresh streams meet in one salt sea , As many lines close in the dial's center , So may a thousand actions , once afoot , End in one purpose , and be all well borne Without defeat .
Pardon the frankness of my mirth if I answer you for that .
If you would conjure in her , you must make a circle ; if conjure up Love in her in his true likeness , he must appear naked and blind .
Can you blame her then , being a maid yet rosed over with the virgin crimson of modesty , if she deny the appearance of a naked blind boy in her naked seeing self ?
It were , my lord , a hard condition for a maid to consign to .
They are then excused , my lord , when they see not what they do .
Then , good my lord , teach your cousin to consent winking .
This moral ties me over to time and a hot summer .
And so I shall catch the fly , your cousin , in the latter end and she must be blind too .
As love is , my lord , before it loves .
It is so .
Shall Kate be my wife ?
So please you .
I am content , so the maiden cities you talk of may wait on her .
So the maid that stood in the way for my wish shall show me the way to my will .
We have consented to all terms of reason .
Is 't so , my lords of England ?
The king hath granted every article , His daughter first , and , in sequel , all , According to their firm proposed natures .
Only he hath not yet subscribed this : Where your Majesty demands that the king of France , having any occasion to write for matter of grant , shall name your Highness in this form and with this addition , in French : Nor this I have not , brother , so denied But your request shall make me let it pass .
I pray you , then , in love and dear alliance , Let that one article rank with the rest , And thereupon give me your daughter .
Amen .
Now welcome , Kate , and bear me witness all That here I kiss her as my sovereign queen .
God , the best maker of all marriages , Combine your hearts in one , your realms in one .
God speak this "amen" !
Amen .
Prepare we for our marriage ; on which day , My Lord of Burgundy , we'll take your oath , And all the peers ' , for surety of our leagues .
Then shall I swear to Kate , and you to me , And may our oaths well kept and prosp'rous be .
Thus far with rough and all-unable pen Our bending author hath pursued the story , In little room confining mighty men , Mangling by starts the full course of their glory .
Henry the Sixth , in infant bands crowned king Of France and England , did this king succeed , Whose state so many had the managing That they lost France and made his England bleed , Which oft our stage hath shown .
And for their sake , In your fair minds let this acceptance take .
If we , with thrice such powers left at home , Can not defend our own doors from the dog , Let us be worried , and our nation lose The name of hardiness and policy .
Call in the messengers sent from the Dauphin .
Now are we well prepared to know the pleasure Of our fair cousin Dauphin , for we hear Your greeting is from him , not from the king .
May 't please your Majesty to give us leave Freely to render what we have in charge , Or shall we sparingly show you far off The Dauphin's meaning and our embassy ?
Piece out our imperfections with your thoughts .
Into a thousand parts divide one man , And make imaginary puissance .
Think , when we talk of horses , that you see them Printing their proud hoofs i ' th ' receiving earth , For 'tis your thoughts that now must deck our kings , Carry them here and there , jumping o'er times ,
We are no tyrant , but a Christian king , Unto whose grace our passion is as subject As is our wretches fettered in our prisons .
Therefore with frank and with uncurbed plainness Tell us the Dauphin's mind .
You can not revel into dukedoms there .
He therefore sends you , meeter for your spirit , This tun of treasure , and , in lieu of this , Desires you let the dukedoms that you claim Hear no more of you .
This the Dauphin speaks .
What treasure , uncle ?
Tennis balls , my liege .
We are glad the Dauphin is so pleasant with us .
His present and your pains we thank you for .
When we have matched our rackets to these balls , We will in France , by God's grace , play a set Shall strike his father's crown into the hazard .
And we understand him well , How he comes o'er us with our wilder days , Not measuring what use we made of them .
We never valued this poor seat of England And therefore , living hence , did give ourself To barbarous license , as 'tis ever common That men are merriest when they are from home .
So get you hence in peace .
And tell the Dauphin His jest will savor but of shallow wit When thousands weep more than did laugh at it .
This was a merry message .
We hope to make the sender blush at it .
Therefore , my lords , omit no happy hour That may give furth'rance to our expedition ; For we have now no thought in us but France , Save those to God , that run before our business .
Therefore let every man now task his thought , That this fair action may on foot be brought .
Now all the youth of England are on fire , And silken dalliance in the wardrobe lies .
Ere he take ship for France , and in Southampton .
There is the playhouse now , there must you sit , And thence to France shall we convey you safe And bring you back , charming the narrow seas To give you gentle pass ; for , if we may , We'll not offend one stomach with our play .
But , till the king come forth , and not till then , Unto Southampton do we shift our scene .
Well met , Corporal Nym .
Good morrow , Lieutenant Bardolph .
What , are Ancient Pistol and you friends yet ?
For my part , I care not .
I will bestow a breakfast to make you friends ; and we'll be all three sworn brothers to France .
Let 't be so , good Corporal Nym .
That is my rest ; that is the rendezvous of it .
I can not tell .
Things must be as they may .
Men may sleep , and they may have their throats about them at that time , and some say knives have edges .
There must be conclusions .
Well , I can not tell .
Here comes Ancient Pistol and his wife .
Now , by this hand , I swear , I scorn the term , Nor shall my Nell keep lodgers .
Oh , well-a-day , Lady !
Pish !
Pish for thee , Iceland dog , Thou prick-eared cur of Iceland !
Good Corporal Nym , show thy valor and put up your sword .
Will you shog off ?
I am not Barbason ; you can not conjure me .
I have an humor to knock you indifferently well .
If you grow foul with me , Pistol , I will scour you with my rapier , as I may , in fair terms .
O braggart vile and damned furious wight , The grave doth gape , and doting death is near .
Therefore exhale .
Hear me , hear me what I say : he that strikes the first stroke , I'll run him up to the hilts , as I am a soldier .
An oath of mickle might , and fury shall abate .
Thy spirits are most tall .
By my troth , he'll yield the crow a pudding one of these days .
The king has killed his heart .
Good husband , come home presently .
Come , shall I make you two friends ?
Let floods o'erswell and fiends for food howl on !
You'll pay me the eight shillings I won of you at betting ?
Base is the slave that pays .
That now I will have , that's the humor of it .
As manhood shall compound .
Push home .
By this sword , he that makes the first thrust , I'll kill him .
By this sword , I will .
Sword" is an oath , and oaths must have their course .
Prithee , put up .
In cash , most justly paid .
Well , then , that's the humor of 't .
As ever you come of women , come in quickly to Sir John .
Ah , poor heart , he is so shaked of a burning quotidian tertian that it is most lamentable to behold .
Sweet men , come to him .
Turning th ' accomplishment of many years Into an hour-glass ; for the which supply , Admit me chorus to this history ; Who , prologue-like , your humble patience pray Gently to hear , kindly to judge our play .
Nym , thou hast spoke the right .
He passes some humors and careers .
They shall be apprehended by and by .
How smooth and even they do bear themselves , As if allegiance in their bosoms sat Crowned with faith and constant loyalty .
The king hath note of all that they intend , By interception which they dream not of .
Now sits the wind fair , and we will aboard .
My Lord of Cambridge , and my kind Lord of Masham , And you , my gentle knight , give me your thoughts .
Think you not that the powers we bear with us Will cut their passage through the force of France , Doing the execution and the act For which we have in head assembled them ?
No doubt , my liege , if each man do his best .
I doubt not that , since we are well-persuaded We carry not a heart with us from hence That grows not in a fair consent with ours , Nor leave not one behind that doth not wish Success and conquest to attend on us .
Never was monarch better feared and loved Than is your Majesty .
There's not , I think , a subject That sits in heart-grief and uneasiness Under the sweet shade of your government .
True .
Those that were your father's enemies Have steeped their galls in honey , and do serve you With hearts create of duty and of zeal .
We therefore have great cause of thankfulness And shall forget the office of our hand Sooner than quittance of desert and merit According to the weight and worthiness .
We judge no less. , Uncle of Exeter , Enlarge the man committed yesterday That railed against our person .
That's mercy , but too much security .
Oh , let us yet be merciful .
And now to our French causes .
Who are the late commissioners ?
I one , my lord .
Your Highness bade me ask for it today .
So did you me , my liege .
And I , my royal sovereign .
I do confess my fault , And do submit me to Your Highness ' mercy .
To which we all appeal .
The mercy that was quick in us but late By your own counsel is suppressed and killed .
Tis so strange That , though the truth of it stands off as gross As black and white , my eye will scarcely see it .
Treason and murder ever kept together As two yoke-devils sworn to either's purpose , Working so grossly in a natural cause That admiration did not whoop at them .
All other devils that suggest by treasons Do botch and bungle up damnation With patches , colors , and with forms being fetched From glist'ring semblances of piety .
But he that tempered thee bade thee stand up , Gave thee no instance why thou shouldst do treason , Unless to dub thee with the name of traitor .
If that same demon that hath gulled thee thus Should with his lion gait walk the whole world , He might return to vasty Tartar back And tell the legions "I can never win A soul so easy as that Englishman's." Oh , how hast thou with jealousy infected The sweetness of affiance !
Why , so didst thou .
Why , so didst thou .
Come they of noble family ?
Why , so didst thou .
Seem they religious ?
Why , so didst thou .
Such and so finely bolted didst thou seem .
And thus thy fall hath left a kind of blot To mark the full-fraught man and best endued With some suspicion .
I will weep for thee , For this revolt of thine methinks is like Another fall of man. , Their faults are open .
I arrest thee of high treason , by the name of Richard , Earl of Cambridge .
I arrest thee of high treason , by the name of Henry , Lord Scroop of Masham .
I arrest thee of high treason , by the name of Thomas Grey , knight , of Northumberland .
Our purposes God justly hath discovered , And I repent my fault more than my death , Which I beseech Your Highness to forgive , Although my body pay the price of it .
For me , the gold of France did not seduce , Although I did admit it as a motive The sooner to effect what I intended ; But God be thanked for prevention , Which I in sufferance heartily will rejoice , Beseeching God and you to pardon me .
Never did faithful subject more rejoice At the discovery of most dangerous treason Than I do at this hour joy o'er myself , Prevented from a damned enterprise .
My fault , but not my body , pardon , sovereign .
God quit you in His mercy .
Touching our person , seek we no revenge , But we our kingdom's safety must so tender , Whose ruin you have sought , that to her laws We do deliver you .
Get you therefore hence , Poor miserable wretches , to your death , The taste whereof God of His mercy give You patience to endure , and true repentance Of all your dear offences. , Bear them hence .
We doubt not of a fair and lucky war , Since God so graciously hath brought to light This dangerous treason lurking in our way To hinder our beginnings .
We doubt not now But every rub is smoothed on our way .
Then forth , dear countrymen .
No king of England if not king of France .
For Falstaff , he is dead , and we must earn therefore .
He's in Arthur's bosom , if ever man went to Arthur's bosom .
I hoped there was no need to trouble himself with any such thoughts yet .
They say he cried out of sack .
Ay , that he did .
And of women .
Nay , that he did not .
A could never abide carnation .
Twas a color he never liked .
He said once the devil would have him about women .
He did in some sort , indeed , handle women , but then he was rheumatic , and talked of the Whore of Babylon .
Do you not remember he saw a flea stick upon Bardolph's nose , and he said it was a black soul burning in hell ?
Shall we shog ?
The King will be gone from Southampton .
Look to my chattels and my movables .
Therefore , Go , clear thy crystals. , Yoke-fellows in arms , Let us to France , like horse-leeches , my boys , To suck , to suck , the very blood to suck .
My lord , I'll tell you that self bill is urged Which in th ' eleventh year of the last king's reign Was like , and had indeed against us passed But that the scambling and unquiet time Did push it out of farther question .
But how , my lord , shall we resist it now ?
It must be thought on .
If it pass against us , We lose the better half of our possession , For all the temporal lands which men devout By testament have given to the Church Would they strip from us , being valued thus : "As much as would maintain , to the King's honor , Full fifteen earls and fifteen hundred knights , Six thousand and two hundred good esquires ; And , to relief of lazars and weak age Of indigent faint souls past corporal toil , A hundred almshouses right well supplied ; And to the coffers of the King besides , A thousand pounds by th ' year." Thus runs the bill .
This would drink deep .
But what prevention ?
The king is full of grace and fair regard .
And a true lover of the holy Church .
And that's but unwholesome food , they say .
Touch her soft mouth , and march .
Farewell , hostess .
Let housewifery appear .
Keep close , I thee command .
Farewell .
Adieu .
Therefore the Dukes of Berri and of Brittany , Of Brabant and of Orleans , shall make forth , And you , Prince Dauphin , with all swift dispatch , To line and new-repair our towns of war With men of courage and with means defendant .
For England his approaches makes as fierce As waters to the sucking of a gulf .
And let us do it with no show of fear , No , with no more than if we heard that England Were busied with a Whitsun morris-dance .
For , my good liege , she is so idly kinged , Her scepter so fantastically borne By a vain , giddy , shallow , humorous youth , That fear attends her not .
Oh peace , Prince Dauphin !
You are too much mistaken in this king .
Question your Grace the late ambassadors With what great state he heard their embassy , How well supplied with noble counselors , How modest in exception , and withal How terrible in constant resolution , And you shall find his vanities forespent Were but the outside of the Roman Brutus , Covering discretion with a coat of folly , As gardeners do with ordure hide those roots That shall first spring and be most delicate .
Well , 'tis not so , my Lord High Constable .
But though we think it so , it is no matter .
In cases of defense 'tis best to weigh The enemy more mighty than he seems .
Up in the air , crowned with the golden sun , Saw his heroical seed and smiled to see him Mangle the work of nature and deface The patterns that by God and by French fathers Had twenty years been made .
This is a stem Of that victorious stock , and let us fear The native mightiness and fate of him .
Ambassadors from Harry King of England Do crave admittance to your Majesty .
We'll give them present audience .
Go , and bring them .
Good my sovereign , Take up the English short , and let them know Of what a monarchy you are the head .
Self-love , my liege , is not so vile a sin As self-neglecting .
From our brother England ?
Or else what follows ?
Bloody constraint , for if you hide the crown Even in your hearts , there will he rake for it .
For us , we will consider of this further .
Tomorrow shall you bear our full intent Back to our brother England .
For the Dauphin , I stand here for him .
What to him from England ?
Scorn and defiance , slight regard , contempt , And anything that may not misbecome The mighty sender , doth he prize you at .
Thus says my king : an if your father's Highness Do not , in grant of all demands at large , Sweeten the bitter mock you sent his Majesty , He'll call you to so hot an answer of it That caves and womby vaultages of France Shall chide your trespass and return your mock In second accent of his ordinance .
To that end , As matching to his youth and vanity , I did present him with the Paris balls .
He'll make your Paris Louvre shake for it , Were it the mistress court of mighty Europe .
And be assured you'll find a difference , As we his subjects have in wonder found , Between the promise of his greener days And these he masters now .
Tomorrow shall you know our mind at full .
Dispatch us with all speed , lest that our king Come here himself to question our delay , For he is footed in this land already .
You shall be soon dispatched with fair conditions .
A night is but small breath and little pause To answer matters of this consequence .
Thus with imagined wing our swift scene flies In motion of no less celerity Than that of thought .
Play with your fancies and in them behold , Upon the hempen tackle , shipboys climbing .
Hear the shrill whistle , which doth order give To sounds confused .
Behold the threaden sails , Borne with th ' invisible and creeping wind , Draw the huge bottoms through the furrowed sea , Breasting the lofty surge .
Oh , do but think You stand upon the rivage and behold A city on th ' inconstant billows dancing , For so appears this fleet majestical Holding due course to Harfleur .
Follow , follow !
Work , work your thoughts , and therein see a siege .
Behold the ordnance on their carriages , With fatal mouths gaping on girded Harfleur .
Suppose th ' Ambassador from the French comes back , Tells Harry that the king doth offer him
Katherine his daughter and with her , to dowry , Some petty and unprofitable dukedoms .
Still be kind And eke out our performance with your mind .
Once more unto the breach , dear friends , once more , Or close the wall up with our English dead !
Now set the teeth and stretch the nostril wide , Hold hard the breath and bend up every spirit To his full height .
On , on , you noblest English , Whose blood is fet from fathers of war-proof , Fathers that , like so many Alexanders , Have in these parts from morn till even fought And sheathed their swords for lack of argument .
Dishonor not your mothers .
Now attest That those whom you called fathers did beget you .
And you , good yeoman , Whose limbs were made in England , show us here The mettle of your pasture .
Let us swear That you are worth your breeding , which I doubt not ,
We are blessed in the change .
List his discourse of war , and you shall hear A fearful battle rendered you in music .
Follow your spirit , and upon this charge Cry "God for Harry , England , and Saint George ! "
On , on , on , on , on !
To the breach , to the breach !
Pray thee , corporal , stay .
The plainsong" is most just , for humors do abound .
Would I were in an alehouse in London !
I would give all my fame for a pot of ale , and safety .
And I .
Up to the breach , you dogs !
Avaunt , you cullions !
Be merciful , great duke , to men of mold .
Good bawcock , 'bate thy rage .
Use lenity , sweet chuck .
These be good humors .
Your Honor wins bad humors .
As young as I am , I have observed these three swashers .
I am boy to them all three , but all they three , though they would serve me , could not be man to me .
They will steal anything and call it purchase .
They would have me as familiar with men's pockets as their gloves or their handkerchers , which makes much against my manhood , if I should take from another's pocket to put into mine , for it is plain pocketing up of wrongs .
I must leave them and seek some better service .
Their villainy goes against my weak stomach , and therefore I must cast it up .
To the mines ?
The concavities of it is not sufficient , for , look you , th ' athversary , you may discuss unto the duke , look you , is digt himself four yard under the countermines .
By Cheshu , I think he will plow up all if there is not better directions .
The duke of Gloucester , to whom the order of the siege is given , is altogether directed by an Irishman , a very valiant gentleman , i ' faith .
It is Captain Macmorris , is it not ?
I think it be .
By Cheshu , he is an ass , as in the world .
I will verify as much in his beard .
He has no more directions in the true disciplines of the wars , look you , of the Roman disciplines , than is a puppy dog .
Here he comes , and the Scots captain , Captain Jamy , with him .
Captain Jamy is a marvelous falorous gentleman , that is certain , and of great expedition and knowledge in th ' aunchient wars , upon my particular knowledge of his directions .
By Cheshu , he will maintain his argument as well as any military man in the world in the disciplines of the pristine wars of the Romans .
I say gudday , Captain Fluellen .
Godden to your Worship , good Captain James .
How now , Captain Macmorris , have you quit the mines ?
Have the pioneers given o'er ?
By Chrish , la , 'tish ill done .
By my hand I swear , and my father's soul , the work ish ill done .
It ish give over .
I would have blowed up the town , so Chrish save me , la , in an hour .
Oh , 'tish ill done , 'tish ill done , by my hand , 'tish ill done .
Captain Macmorris , I beseech you now , will you voutsafe me , look you , a few disputations with you as partly touching or concerning the disciplines of the war , the Roman wars ?
In the way of argument , look you , and friendly communication , partly to satisfy my opinion , and partly for the satisfaction , look you , of my mind , as touching the direction of the military discipline , that is the point .
What enterprise , Popillius ?
Fare you well .
Look how he makes to Caesar .
Mark him .
Casca , be sudden , for we fear prevention , Brutus , what shall be done ?
If this be known , Cassius or Caesar never shall turn back , For I will slay myself .
Cassius , be constant .
Trebonius knows his time .
Where is Metellus Cimber ?
Let him go And presently prefer his suit to Caesar .
He is addressed .
Press near and second him .
Casca , you are the first that rears your hand .
Are we all ready ?
Most high , most mighty , and most puissant Caesar , Metellus Cimber throws before thy seat An humble heart , I must prevent thee , Cimber .
These couchings and these lowly courtesies Might fire the blood of ordinary men And turn preordinance and first decree Into the law of children .
What , Brutus ?
I could be well moved if I were as you .
If I could pray to move , prayers would move me .
But I am constant as the northern star , Of whose true-fixed and resting quality There is no fellow in the firmament .
The skies are painted with unnumbered sparks .
So in the world .
And that I am he Let me a little show it even in this : That I was constant Cimber should be banished , And constant do remain to keep him so .
Hence !
Wilt thou lift up Olympus ?
Doth not Brutus bootless kneel ?
Speak , hands , for me !
Liberty !
Freedom !
Tyranny is dead !
Run hence , proclaim , cry it about the streets .
Some to the common pulpits , and cry out , "Liberty , freedom , and enfranchisement ! " People and senators , be not affrighted .
Fly not .
Go to the pulpit , Brutus .
And Cassius too .
Where's Publius ?
Stand fast together , lest some friend of Caesar's Should chance , Talk not of standing. , Publius , good cheer .
There is no harm intended to your person , Nor to no Roman else .
So tell them , Publius .
And leave us , Publius , lest that the people , Rushing on us , should do your age some mischief .
Do so .
And let no man abide this deed But we the doers .
Where is Antony ?
Fled to his house amazed .
Men , wives , and children stare , cry out , and run As it were doomsday .
Why , he that cuts off twenty years of life Cuts off so many years of fearing death .
Stoop , Romans , stoop , And let us bathe our hands in Caesar's blood Up to the elbows , and besmear our swords .
Then walk we forth , even to the marketplace , And waving our red weapons o'er our heads Let's all cry , "Peace , freedom , and liberty ! " Stoop , then , and wash .
Who calls ?
Bid every noise be still .
Peace yet again .
Who is it in the press that calls on me ?
I hear a tongue , shriller than all the music , Cry "Caesar ! " , Speak .
Caesar is turned to hear .
Beware the ides of March .
What man is that ?
A soothsayer bids you beware the ides of March .
Set him before me .
Let me see his face .
Fellow , come from the throng .
Look upon Caesar .
What sayst thou to me now ?
Speak once again .
Beware the ides of March .
He is a dreamer .
Let us leave him .
Pass !
Will you go see the order of the course ?
How many times shall Caesar bleed in sport , That now on Pompey's basis lies along No worthier than the dust !
Ay , every man away .
Brutus shall lead , and we will grace his heels With the most boldest and best hearts of Rome .
Soft !
Who comes here ?
A friend of Antony's .
Thy master is a wise and valiant Roman .
I never thought him worse .
Tell him , so please him come unto this place , He shall be satisfied and , by my honor , Depart untouched .
I know that we shall have him well to friend .
But here comes Antony. , Welcome , Mark Antony .
O mighty Caesar !
Dost thou lie so low ?
Are all thy conquests , glories , triumphs , spoils , Shrunk to this little measure ?
Fare thee well .
I know not , gentlemen , what you intend , Who else must be let blood , who else is rank .
If I myself , there is no hour so fit As Caesar's death's hour , nor no instrument Of half that worth as those your swords , made rich With the most noble blood of all this world .
I do beseech ye , if you bear me hard , Now , whilst your purpled hands do reek and smoke , Fulfill your pleasure .
Live a thousand years , I shall not find myself so apt to die .
No place will please me so , no mean of death , As here by Caesar , and by you cut off , The choice and master spirits of this age .
O Antony , beg not your death of us .
They are pitiful .
And pity to the general wrong of Rome , As fire drives out fire , so pity pity , Hath done this deed on Caesar .
For your part , To you our swords have leaden points , Mark Antony .
Our arms in strength of malice and our hearts Of brothers ' temper do receive you in With all kind love , good thoughts , and reverence .
Your voice shall be as strong as any man's In the disposing of new dignities .
Only be patient till we have appeased The multitude , beside themselves with fear , And then we will deliver you the cause , Why I , that did love Caesar when I struck him , Have thus proceeded .
I doubt not of your wisdom .
Let each man render me his bloody hand .
Mark Antony , Pardon me , Caius Cassius .
Therefore I took your hands , but was indeed Swayed from the point by looking down on Caesar .
Friends am I with you all and love you all Upon this hope : that you shall give me reasons Why and wherein Caesar was dangerous .
Our reasons are so full of good regard That were you , Antony , the son of Caesar , You should be satisfied .
You shall , Mark Antony .
Brutus , a word with you .
It shall advantage more than do us wrong .
Mark Antony , here , take you Caesar's body .
You shall not in your funeral speech blame us , But speak all good you can devise of Caesar , And say you do 't by our permission .
And you shall speak In the same pulpit whereto I am going , After my speech is ended .
Be it so .
I do desire no more .
Prepare the body then , and follow us .
Thou art the ruins of the noblest man That ever lived in the tide of times .
Woe to the hand that shed this costly blood !
Over thy wounds now do I prophesy , Which , like dumb mouths , do ope their ruby lips To beg the voice and utterance of my tongue , A curse shall light upon the limbs of men .
Domestic fury and fierce civil strife Shall cumber all the parts of Italy .
I do , Mark Antony .
Caesar did write for him to come to Rome .
He did receive his letters and is coming .
Passion , I see , is catching , for mine eyes , Seeing those beads of sorrow stand in thine , Began to water .
Is thy master coming ?
He lies tonight within seven leagues of Rome .
Post back with speed , and tell him what hath chanced .
Thou shalt not back till I have borne this corse Into the marketplace .
Lend me your hand .
We will be satisfied !
Let us be satisfied !
Then follow me and give me audience , friends .
Cassius , go you into the other street And part the numbers .
Those that will hear me speak , let 'em stay here .
Those that will follow Cassius , go with him , And public reasons shall be rendered Of Caesar's death .
I will hear Brutus speak .
I will hear Cassius and compare their reasons When severally we hear them rendered .
The noble Brutus is ascended .
Be patient till the last .
Romans , countrymen , and lovers !
Hear me for my cause , and be silent that you may hear .
Believe me for mine honor , and have respect to mine honor that you may believe .
Censure me in your wisdom , and awake your senses that you may the better judge .
If there be any in this assembly , any dear friend of Caesar's , to him I say that Brutus ' love to Caesar was no less than his .
If then that friend demand why Brutus rose against Caesar , this is my answer : not that I loved Caesar less , but that I loved Rome more .
Had you rather Caesar were living and die all slaves , than that Caesar were dead , to live all free men ?
As Caesar loved me , I weep for him .
As he was fortunate , I rejoice at it .
As he was valiant , I honor him .
But , as he was ambitious , I slew him .
There is tears for his love , joy for his fortune , honor for his valor , and death for his ambition .
Who is here so base that would be a bondman ?
If any , speak , for him have I offended .
Who is here so rude that would not be a Roman ?
If any , speak , for him have I offended .
Who is here so vile that will not love his country ?
If any , speak , for him have I offended .
I pause for a reply .
None , Brutus , none .
Then none have I offended .
I have done no more to Caesar than you shall do to Brutus .
The question of his death is enrolled in the Capitol .
His glory not extenuated wherein he was worthy , nor his offenses enforced for which he suffered death .
Here comes his body , mourned by Mark Antony , who , though he had no hand in his death , shall receive the benefit of his dying , a place in the commonwealth , as which of you shall not ?
Live , Brutus !
Live , live !
Bring him with triumph home unto his house !
I am not gamesome .
I do lack some part Of that quick spirit that is in Antony .
Let me not hinder , Cassius , your desires .
I'll leave you .
Cassius , Be not deceived .
Tell me , good Brutus , can you see your face ?
Let him be Caesar !
Caesar's better parts Shall be crowned in Brutus !
We'll bring him to his house with shouts and clamors .
My countrymen , Peace , silence !
Brutus speaks .
Peace , ho !
Good countrymen , let me depart alone .
I do entreat you , not a man depart , Save I alone , till Antony have spoke .
Let him go up into the public chair .
We'll hear him. , Noble Antony , go up .
For Brutus ' sake , I am beholding to you .
What does he say of Brutus ?
He says for Brutus ' sake He finds himself beholding to us all .
Twere best he speak no harm of Brutus here .
This Caesar was a tyrant .
Nay , that's certain .
We are blest that Rome is rid of him .
Peace !
Let us hear what Antony can say .
You gentle Romans , Peace , ho !
Let us hear him .
Friends , Romans , countrymen , lend me your ears .
I come to bury Caesar , not to praise him .
The evil that men do lives after them ; The good is oft interred with their bones .
So let it be with Caesar .
The noble Brutus Hath told you Caesar was ambitious .
If it were so , it was a grievous fault , And grievously hath Caesar answered it .
Here , under leave of Brutus and the rest , For Brutus is an honorable man ; So are they all , all honorable men , Come I to speak in Caesar's funeral .
He was my friend , faithful and just to me .
But Brutus says he was ambitious , And Brutus is an honorable man .
He hath brought many captives home to Rome Whose ransoms did the general coffers fill .
Did this in Caesar seem ambitious ?
When that the poor have cried , Caesar hath wept .
Ambition should be made of sterner stuff .
Yet Brutus says he was ambitious , And Brutus is an honorable man .
You all did see that on the Lupercal I thrice presented him a kingly crown , Which he did thrice refuse .
Was this ambition ?
I speak not to disprove what Brutus spoke , But here I am to speak what I do know .
If thou consider rightly of the matter , Caesar has had great wrong .
Has he , masters ?
He would not take the crown .
Therefore 'tis certain he was not ambitious .
If it be found so , some will dear abide it .
Poor soul !
His eyes are red as fire with weeping .
There's not a nobler man in Rome than Antony .
But yesterday the word of Caesar might Have stood against the world .
Now lies he there , And none so poor to do him reverence .
O masters , if I were disposed to stir Your hearts and minds to mutiny and rage , I should do Brutus wrong , and Cassius wrong , Who , you all know , are honorable men .
I will not do them wrong .
I rather choose To wrong the dead , to wrong myself and you , Than I will wrong such honorable men .
But here's a parchment with the seal of Caesar .
Let but the commons hear this testament , Which , pardon me , I do not mean to read , And they would go and kiss dead Caesar's wounds And dip their napkins in his sacred blood , Yea , beg a hair of him for memory , And , dying , mention it within their wills , Bequeathing it as a rich legacy Unto their issue .
We'll hear the will .
Read it , Mark Antony !
The will , the will !
We will hear Caesar's will .
It is not meet you know how Caesar loved you .
You are not wood , you are not stones , but men .
And , being men , bearing the will of Caesar , It will inflame you , it will make you mad .
Read the will .
We'll hear it , Antony .
You shall read us the will , Caesar's will .
Will you be patient ?
Will you stay awhile ?
I have o'ershot myself to tell you of it .
I fear I wrong the honorable men Whose daggers have stabbed Caesar .
They were traitors !
The testament !
They were villains , murderers .
The will !
Read the will !
You will compel me , then , to read the will ?
Then make a ring about the corpse of Caesar , And let me show you him that made the will .
Shall I descend ?
And will you give me leave ?
Come down .
Descend .
You shall have leave .
Stand from the hearse .
Stand from the body .
Room for Antony , most noble Antony !
Nay , press not so upon me .
Stand far off .
Stand back .
Room !
If you have tears , prepare to shed them now .
You all do know this mantle .
I remember The first time ever Caesar put it on .
Twas on a summer's evening in his tent , That day he overcame the Nervii .
Look , in this place ran Cassius ' dagger through .
See what a rent the envious Casca made .
For Brutus , as you know , was Caesar's angel .
Judge , O you gods , how dearly Caesar loved him !
This was the most unkindest cut of all .
Then burst his mighty heart , And , in his mantle muffling up his face , Even at the base of Pompey's statue , Which all the while ran blood , great Caesar fell .
O , what a fall was there , my countrymen !
Then I , and you , and all of us fell down , Whilst bloody treason flourished over us .
Oh , now you weep , and , I perceive , you feel The dint of pity .
These are gracious drops .
Kind souls , what , weep you when you but behold Our Caesar's vesture wounded ?
Look you here , Here is himself , marred , as you see , with traitors .
O piteous spectacle !
O noble Caesar !
O woeful day !
O traitors , villains !
O most bloody sight !
About !
Seek !
Burn !
Fire !
Kill !
Slay !
Stay , countrymen .
Peace there !
Hear the noble Antony .
They that have done this deed are honorable .
What private griefs they have , alas , I know not , That made them do it .
They are wise and honorable , And will , no doubt , with reasons answer you .
I come not , friends , to steal away your hearts .
For I have neither wit nor words nor worth , Action nor utterance nor the power of speech , To stir men's blood .
I only speak right on .
But were I Brutus , And Brutus Antony , there were an Antony Would ruffle up your spirits and put a tongue In every wound of Caesar that should move The stones of Rome to rise and mutiny .
We'll mutiny .
We'll burn the house of Brutus .
Away , then !
Come , seek the conspirators .
Yet hear me , countrymen .
Yet hear me speak .
Peace , ho !
Hear Antony .
Most noble Antony !
Why , friends , you go to do you know not what .
Wherein hath Caesar thus deserved your loves ?
Alas , you know not .
I must tell you then .
You have forgot the will I told you of .
Most true .
The will !
Let's stay and hear the will .
Most noble Caesar !
We'll revenge his death .
O royal Caesar !
Hear me with patience .
Peace , ho !
Moreover , he hath left you all his walks , His private arbors and new-planted orchards , On this side Tiber .
He hath left them you And to your heirs forever , common pleasures , To walk abroad and recreate yourselves .
Here was a Caesar !
When comes such another ?
We'll burn his body in the holy place , And with the brands fire the traitors ' houses .
Take up the body .
Go fetch fire .
Now let it work .
How now , fellow ?
Sir , Octavius is already come to Rome .
Where is he ?
He and Lepidus are at Caesar's house .
And thither will I straight to visit him .
He comes upon a wish .
Fortune is merry , And in this mood will give us anything .
I heard him say , Brutus and Cassius Are rid like madmen through the gates of Rome .
Belike they had some notice of the people How I had moved them .
Bring me to Octavius .
Tis just .
And it is very much lamented , Brutus , That you have no such mirrors as will turn Your hidden worthiness into your eye That you might see your shadow .
I have heard Where many of the best respect in Rome , Except immortal Caesar , speaking of Brutus And groaning underneath this age's yoke , Have wished that noble Brutus had his eyes .
Into what dangers would you lead me , Cassius , That you would have me seek into myself For that which is not in me ?
Therefore , good Brutus , be prepared to hear .
And since you know you can not see yourself So well as by reflection , I , your glass , Will modestly discover to yourself That of yourself which you yet know not of .
And be not jealous on me , gentle Brutus .
Were I a common laugher , or did use To stale with ordinary oaths my love To every new protester , if you know That I do fawn on men and hug them hard And , after , scandal them , or if you know That I profess myself in banqueting To all the rout , then hold me dangerous .
What means this shouting ?
I do fear , the people Choose Caesar for their king .
Ay , do you fear it ?
Then must I think you would not have it so .
I dreamt tonight that I did feast with Caesar , And things unlucky charge my fantasy .
I have no will to wander forth of doors , Yet something leads me forth .
What is your name ?
Whither are you going ?
Where do you dwell ?
Are you a married man or a bachelor ?
Answer every man directly .
Ay , and briefly .
Ay , and wisely .
What is my name ?
Whither am I going ?
Where do I dwell ?
Am I a married man or a bachelor ?
Then , to answer every man directly and briefly , wisely and truly , wisely I say , I am a bachelor .
That's as much as to say they are fools that marry .
You'll bear me a bang for that , I fear .
Directly , I am going to Caesar's funeral .
As a friend or an enemy ?
As a friend .
Briefly , I dwell by the Capitol .
Your name , sir , truly .
Truly , my name is Cinna .
Tear him to pieces .
He's a conspirator .
I am not Cinna the conspirator .
It is no matter .
His name's Cinna .
Pluck but his name out of his heart and turn him going .
Tear him , tear him !
Come , brands , ho , firebrands .
To Brutus ' , to Cassius ' , burn all .
Some to Decius ' house and some to Casca's .
Some to Ligarius ' .
Away , go !
These many , then , shall die .
Their names are pricked .
I do consent , Prick him down , Antony .
Upon condition Publius shall not live , Who is your sister's son , Mark Antony .
He shall not live .
Look , with a spot I damn him .
But , Lepidus , go you to Caesar's house .
Fetch the will hither , and we shall determine How to cut off some charge in legacies .
What , shall I find you here ?
Or here , or at the Capitol .
This is a slight , unmeritable man , Meet to be sent on errands .
Is it fit , The threefold world divided , he should stand One of the three to share it ?
Octavius , I have seen more days than you .
And though we lay these honors on this man To ease ourselves of divers slanderous loads , He shall but bear them as the ass bears gold , To groan and sweat under the business , Either led or driven , as we point the way .
And having brought our treasure where we will , Then take we down his load and turn him off , Like to the empty ass , to shake his ears And graze in commons .
You may do your will , But he's a tried and valiant soldier .
So is my horse , Octavius , and for that I do appoint him store of provender .
Stand , ho !
Give the word , ho , and stand .
What now , Lucillius ?
Is Cassius near ?
He is at hand , and Pindarus is come To do you salutation from his master .
But if he be at hand I shall be satisfied .
He is not doubted. , A word , Lucillius .
But not with such familiar instances Nor with such free and friendly conference As he hath used of old .
Thou hast described A hot friend cooling .
There are no tricks in plain and simple faith .
But hollow men , like horses hot at hand , Make gallant show and promise of their mettle .
But when they should endure the bloody spur , They fall their crests and , like deceitful jades , Sink in the trial .
Comes his army on ?
They mean this night in Sardis to be quartered .
The greater part , the horse in general , Are come with Cassius .
Hark !
He is arrived .
March gently on to meet him .
Stand , ho !
Stand , ho !
Speak the word along .
Stand !
Stand !
Stand !
Most noble brother , you have done me wrong .
Judge me , you gods !
Wrong I mine enemies ?
And when you do them , Cassius , be content .
Before the eyes of both our armies here , Which should perceive nothing but love from us , Let us not wrangle .
Bid them move away .
Then in my tent , Cassius , enlarge your griefs , And I will give you audience .
Pindarus , Bid our commanders lead their charges off A little from this ground .
Let Lucius and Titinius guard our door .
That you have wronged me doth appear in this : You have condemned and noted Lucius Pella For taking bribes here of the Sardians , Wherein my letters , praying on his side Because I knew the man , were slighted off .
You wronged yourself to write in such a case .
In such a time as this it is not meet That every nice offense should bear his comment .
Let me tell you , Cassius , you yourself Are much condemned to have an itching palm , To sell and mart your offices for gold To undeservers .
I "an itching palm" !
You know that you are Brutus that speak this , Or , by the gods , this speech were else your last .
The name of Cassius honors this corruption , And chastisement doth therefore hide his head .
Chastisement !
Remember March , the ides of March remember .
Did not great Julius bleed for justice ' sake ?
What villain touched his body , that did stab , And not for justice ?
What , shall one of us That struck the foremost man of all this world But for supporting robbers , shall we now Contaminate our fingers with base bribes , And sell the mighty space of our large honors For so much trash as may be grasped thus ?
I had rather be a dog and bay the moon Than such a Roman .
Brutus , bait not me .
I'll not endure it .
You forget yourself To hedge me in .
I am a soldier , I , Older in practice , abler than yourself To make conditions .
Go to .
You are not , Cassius .
I am .
I say you are not .
Urge me no more , I shall forget myself .
Have mind upon your health , tempt me no further .
Away , slight man !
Is 't possible ?
Hear me , for I will speak .
Shall I be frighted when a madman stares ?
But wherefore do you hold me here so long ?
What is it that you would impart to me ?
I know that virtue to be in you , Brutus , As well as I do know your outward favor .
Well , honor is the subject of my story .
I can not tell what you and other men Think of this life , but , for my single self , I had as lief not be as live to be In awe of such a thing as I myself .
I was born free as Caesar .
So were you .
We both have fed as well , and we can both Endure the winter's cold as well as he .
For once upon a raw and gusty day , The troubled Tiber chafing with her shores , Caesar said to me , "Darest thou , Cassius , now Leap in with me into this angry flood And swim to yonder point ? " Upon the word , Accoutred as I was , I plunged in And bade him follow .
So indeed he did .
But ere we could arrive the point proposed , Caesar cried , "Help me , Cassius , or I sink ! " I , as Aeneas , our great ancestor , Did from the flames of Troy upon his shoulder The old Anchises bear , so from the waves of Tiber Did I the tired Caesar .
All this" ?
Ay , more .
Fret till your proud heart break .
Go show your slaves how choleric you are And make your bondmen tremble .
Is it come to this ?
You say you are a better soldier .
Let it appear so .
Make your vaunting true , And it shall please me well .
For mine own part , I shall be glad to learn of noble men .
You wrong me every way .
You wrong me , Brutus .
When Caesar lived , he durst not thus have moved me .
Peace , peace !
You durst not so have tempted him .
I durst not !
No .
For your life you durst not .
Do not presume too much upon my love .
I may do that I shall be sorry for .
You have done that you should be sorry for .
There is no terror , Cassius , in your threats , For I am armed so strong in honesty That they pass by me as the idle wind , Which I respect not .
I did send To you for gold to pay my legions , Which you denied me .
Was that done like Cassius ?
Should I have answered Caius Cassius so ?
I denied you not .
You did .
I did not .
He was but a fool that brought My answer back .
Brutus hath rived my heart .
A friend should bear his friend's infirmities , But Brutus makes mine greater than they are .
I do not , till you practice them on me .
You love me not .
I do not like your faults .
A friendly eye could never see such faults .
A flatterer's would not , though they do appear As huge as high Olympus .
Oh , I could weep My spirit from mine eyes .
Sheathe your dagger .
Be angry when you will , it shall have scope .
Do what you will , dishonor shall be humor .
When I spoke that , I was ill-tempered too .
Do you confess so much ?
Give me your hand .
And my heart too .
O Brutus !
What's the matter ?
Have not you love enough to bear with me , When that rash humor which my mother gave me Makes me forgetful ?
Yes , Cassius .
And from henceforth When you are over-earnest with your Brutus , He'll think your mother chides and leave you so .
How now ?
What's the matter ?
For shame , you generals !
What do you mean ?
Love , and be friends as two such men should be .
For I have seen more years , I'm sure , than ye .
Bear with him , Brutus .
Tis his fashion .
I'll know his humor when he knows his time .
What should the wars do with these jigging fools ?
Companion , hence !
Away , away , be gone .
Lucillius and Titinius , bid the commanders Prepare to lodge their companies tonight .
And come yourselves , and bring Messala with you , Immediately to us .
I did not think you could have been so angry .
O Cassius , I am sick of many griefs .
Portia is dead .
Ha , Portia ?
She is dead .
O insupportable and touching loss !
Upon what sickness ?
Impatient of my absence , And grief that young Octavius with Mark Antony Have made themselves so strong , for with her death That tidings came , with this she fell distract And , her attendants absent , swallowed fire .
And died so ?
Even so .
O ye immortal gods !
My heart is thirsty for that noble pledge .
Fill , Lucius , till the wine o'erswell the cup .
I can not drink too much of Brutus ' love .
Now sit we close about this taper here And call in question our necessities .
Portia , art thou gone ?
No more , I pray you .
Messala , I have here received letters That young Octavius and Mark Antony Come down upon us with a mighty power , Bending their expedition toward Philippi .
Myself have letters of the selfsame tenor .
With what addition ?
That by proscription and bills of outlawry , Octavius , Antony , and Lepidus Have put to death an hundred senators .
Therein our letters do not well agree .
Mine speak of seventy senators that died By their proscriptions , Cicero being one .
Cicero one ?
Cicero is dead , And by that order of proscription .
No , Messala .
Nor nothing in your letters writ of her ?
Nothing , Messala .
That methinks is strange .
Why ask you ?
Hear you aught of her in yours ?
No , my lord .
Now , as you are a Roman , tell me true .
Then like a Roman bear the truth I tell .
For certain she is dead , and by strange manner .
Why , farewell , Portia .
We must die , Messala .
With meditating that she must die once , I have the patience to endure it now .
Even so great men great losses should endure .
I have as much of this in art as you , But yet my nature could not bear it so .
Well , to our work alive .
What do you think Of marching to Philippi presently ?
I do not think it good .
Your reason ?
This it is : 'T is better that the enemy seek us .
So shall he waste his means , weary his soldiers , Doing himself offense , whilst we , lying still , Are full of rest , defense , and nimbleness .
The enemy , marching along by them , By them shall make a fuller number up , Come on refreshed , new-added , and encouraged , From which advantage shall we cut him off If at Philippi we do face him there , These people at our back .
Hear me , good brother , Under your pardon .
You must note beside , That we have tried the utmost of our friends , Our legions are brim-full , our cause is ripe .
The enemy increaseth every day .
We , at the height , are ready to decline .
On such a full sea are we now afloat , And we must take the current when it serves Or lose our ventures .
Then , with your will , go on .
We'll along ourselves , and meet them at Philippi .
The deep of night is crept upon our talk , And nature must obey necessity , Which we will niggard with a little rest .
There is no more to say ?
No more .
Good night .
Early tomorrow will we rise and hence .
Lucius !
Never come such division 'tween our souls .
Let it not , Brutus .
Is now become a god , and Cassius is A wretched creature and must bend his body If Caesar carelessly but nod on him .
He had a fever when he was in Spain , And when the fit was on him , I did mark How he did shake .
Tis true , this god did shake !
His coward lips did from their color fly , And that same eye whose bend doth awe the world Did lose his luster .
I did hear him groan , Ay , and that tongue of his that bade the Romans Mark him and write his speeches in their books , "Alas , " it cried , "give me some drink , Titinius , " As a sick girl .
Ye gods , it doth amaze me A man of such a feeble temper should So get the start of the majestic world And bear the palm alone .
Another general shout !
I do believe that these applauses are For some new honors that are heaped on Caesar .
Why , man , he doth bestride the narrow world Like a Colossus , and we petty men Walk under his huge legs and peep about To find ourselves dishonorable graves .
Men at some time are masters of their fates .
The fault , dear Brutus , is not in our stars But in ourselves , that we are underlings .
Brutus and Caesar , what should be in that "Caesar" ?
Why should that name be sounded more than yours ?
Write them together , yours is as fair a name .
Sound them , it doth become the mouth as well .
Everything is well .
Good night , my lord .
Good night , good brother .
Good night , Lord Brutus .
Farewell , everyone .
Give me the gown .
Where is thy instrument ?
Here in the tent .
What , thou speak'st drowsily ?
Call Claudio and some other of my men .
I'll have them sleep on cushions in my tent .
Varrus and Claudio !
Calls my lord ?
I pray you , sirs , lie in my tent and sleep .
It may be I shall raise you by and by On business to my brother Cassius .
So please you , we will stand and watch your pleasure .
Look , Lucius , here's the book I sought for so .
I put it in the pocket of my gown .
I was sure your lordship did not give it me .
Canst thou hold up thy heavy eyes awhile , And touch thy instrument a strain or two ?
Ay , my lord , an 't please you .
It does , my boy .
I trouble thee too much , but thou art willing .
It is my duty , sir .
I should not urge thy duty past thy might .
I know young bloods look for a time of rest .
I have slept , my lord , already .
It was well done , and thou shalt sleep again .
I will not hold thee long .
If I do live , I will be good to thee .
This is a sleepy tune .
O murderous slumber , Layst thou thy leaden mace upon my boy That plays thee music ? , Gentle knave , good night .
I will not do thee so much wrong to wake thee .
And , good boy , good night .
Let me see , let me see .
Is not the leaf turned down Where I left reading ?
Here it is , I think .
I think it is the weakness of mine eyes That shapes this monstrous apparition .
It comes upon me. , Art thou any thing ?
Art thou some god , some angel , or some devil That makest my blood cold and my hair to stare ?
Speak to me what thou art .
Thy evil spirit , Brutus .
Why comest thou ?
To tell thee thou shalt see me at Philippi .
Well , then I shall see thee again ?
Ay , at Philippi .
Why , I will see thee at Philippi , then .
Ill spirit , I would hold more talk with thee .
Claudio !
The strings , my lord , are false .
He thinks he still is at his instrument .
Lucius , awake .
My lord ?
Didst thou dream , Lucius , that thou so criedst out ?
My lord , I do not know that I did cry .
Yes , that thou didst .
Didst thou see any thing ?
Nothing , my lord .
My lord ?
My lord ?
Why did you so cry out , sirs , in your sleep ?
Did we , my lord ?
Ay .
Saw you anything ?
No , my lord , I saw nothing .
Nor I , my lord .
Go and commend me to my brother Cassius .
Bid him set on his powers betimes before , And we will follow .
It shall be done , my lord .
Now , Antony , our hopes are answered .
You said the enemy would not come down But keep the hills and upper regions .
It proves not so .
Their battles are at hand .
They mean to warn us at Philippi here , Answering before we do demand of them .
Tut , I am in their bosoms , and I know Wherefore they do it .
They could be content To visit other places , and come down With fearful bravery , thinking by this face To fasten in our thoughts that they have courage .
But 'tis not so .
Prepare you , generals .
The enemy comes on in gallant show .
Their bloody sign of battle is hung out , And something to be done immediately .
Octavius , lead your battle softly on , Upon the left hand of the even field .
Upon the right hand I .
Keep thou the left .
Why do you cross me in this exigent ?
They stand and would have parley .
Stand fast , Titinius .
We must out and talk .
Mark Antony , shall we give sign of battle ?
No , Caesar , we will answer on their charge .
Make forth .
The generals would have some words .
Words before blows .
Is it so , countrymen ?
Not that we love words better , as you do .
Good words are better than bad strokes , Octavius .
In your bad strokes , Brutus , you give good words .
But for your words , they rob the Hybla bees And leave them honeyless .
Not stingless too ?
Villains , you did not so when your vile daggers Hacked one another in the sides of Caesar .
Flatterers ? , Now , Brutus , thank yourself .
When think you that the sword goes up again ?
Never , till Caesar's three and thirty wounds Be well avenged , or till another Caesar Have added slaughter to the sword of traitors .
Caesar , thou canst not die by traitors ' hands Unless thou bring'st them with thee .
So I hope .
I was not born to die on Brutus ' sword .
O , if thou wert the noblest of thy strain , Young man , thou couldst not die more honorable .
A peevish schoolboy , worthless of such honor , Joined with a masker and a reveler !
Old Cassius still .
If you dare fight today , come to the field .
If not , when you have stomachs .
Why , now , blow wind , swell billow , and swim bark !
The storm is up and all is on the hazard .
Messala !
Messala , This is my birthday , as this very day Was Cassius born .
Give me thy hand , Messala .
Be thou my witness that against my will , As Pompey was , am I compelled to set Upon one battle all our liberties .
You know that I held Epicurus strong And his opinion .
Now I change my mind , And partly credit things that do presage .
Coming from Sardis , on our former ensign Two mighty eagles fell , and there they perched , Gorging and feeding from our soldiers ' hands , Who to Philippi here consorted us .
This morning are they fled away and gone , And in their steads do ravens , crows , and kites Fly o'er our heads and downward look on us As we were sickly prey .
Their shadows seem A canopy most fatal , under which Our army lies , ready to give up the ghost .
Believe not so .
I but believe it partly , For I am fresh of spirit and resolved To meet all perils very constantly .
Now , most noble Brutus , The gods today stand friendly that we may , Lovers in peace , lead on our days to age .
But since the affairs of men rest still incertain , Let's reason with the worst that may befall .
If we do lose this battle , then is this The very last time we shall speak together .
What are you then determined to do ?
Brutus" will start a spirit as soon as "Caesar." Now in the names of all the gods at once , Upon what meat doth this our Caesar feed That he is grown so great ?
Age , thou art shamed !
Rome , thou hast lost the breed of noble bloods !
When went there by an age , since the great flood , But it was famed with more than with one man ?
When could they say till now , that talked of Rome , That her wide walks encompassed but one man ?
Now is it Rome indeed , and room enough , When there is in it but one only man .
Oh , you and I have heard our fathers say , There was a Brutus once that would have brooked Th ' eternal devil to keep his state in Rome As easily as a king .
That you do love me , I am nothing jealous .
What you would work me to , I have some aim .
How I have thought of this and of these times I shall recount hereafter .
For this present , I would not , so with love I might entreat you , Be any further moved .
What you have said I will consider , what you have to say I will with patience hear , and find a time Both meet to hear and answer such high things .
Till then , my noble friend , chew upon this : Brutus had rather be a villager Than to repute himself a son of Rome Under these hard conditions as this time Is like to lay upon us .
I am glad that my weak words Have struck but thus much show of fire from Brutus .
Then if we lose this battle You are contented to be led in triumph Thorough the streets of Rome ?
No , Cassius , no .
Think not , thou noble Roman , That ever Brutus will go bound to Rome .
He bears too great a mind .
Therefore our everlasting farewell take .
Forever and forever farewell , Cassius .
If we do meet again , why , we shall smile .
If not , why then this parting was well made .
Forever and forever farewell , Brutus .
If we do meet again , we'll smile indeed .
If not , 'tis true this parting was well made .
Why then , lead on .
Oh , that a man might know The end of this day's business ere it come !
But it sufficeth that the day will end , And then the end is known. , Come , ho !
Away !
Ride , ride , Messala , ride , and give these bills Unto the legions on the other side .
Let them set on at once , for I perceive But cold demeanor in Octavius ' wing , And sudden push gives them the overthrow .
Ride , ride , Messala .
Myself have to mine own turned enemy .
O Cassius , Brutus gave the word too early , Who , having some advantage on Octavius , Took it too eagerly .
Fly further off , my lord , fly further off .
Mark Antony is in your tents , my lord .
Fly , therefore , noble Cassius , fly far off .
Are those my tents where I perceive the fire ?
They are , my lord .
Titinius , if thou lovest me , Mount thou my horse , and hide thy spurs in him Till he have brought thee up to yonder troops And here again , that I may rest assured Whether yond troops are friend or enemy .
I will be here again , even with a thought .
Go , Pindarus , get higher on that hill .
My sight was ever thick .
Regard Titinius , And tell me what thou notest about the field .
This day I breathed first .
Time is come round , And where I did begin , there shall I end .
My life is run his compass .
What news ?
And , hark !
They shout for joy .
Come down , behold no more .
Oh , coward that I am , to live so long To see my best friend ta'en before my face !
Come hither , sirrah .
Come now , keep thine oath .
Caesar , thou art revenged , Even with the sword that killed thee .
So I am free .
Yet would not so have been , Durst I have done my will .
O Cassius , Far from this country Pindarus shall run , Where never Roman shall take note of him .
It is but change , Titinius , for Octavius Is overthrown by noble Brutus ' power , As Cassius ' legions are by Antony .
These tidings will well comfort Cassius .
Where did you leave him ?
All disconsolate , With Pindarus his bondman on this hill .
Is not that he that lies upon the ground ?
He lies not like the living .
O my heart !
Is not that he ?
What , Pindarus !
Where art thou , Pindarus ?
Seek him , Titinius , whilst I go to meet The noble Brutus , thrusting this report Into his ears .
I may say "thrusting" it , For piercing steel and darts envenomed Shall be as welcome to the ears of Brutus As tidings of this sight .
Hie you , Messala , And I will seek for Pindarus the while .
Why didst thou send me forth , brave Cassius ?
Did I not meet thy friends ?
And did not they Put on my brows this wreath of victory And bid me give it thee ?
Didst thou not hear their shouts ?
Alas , thou hast misconstrued everything !
But , hold thee , take this garland on thy brow .
Thy Brutus bid me give it thee , and I Will do his bidding .
Where , where , Messala , doth his body lie ?
Lo , yonder , and Titinius mourning it .
Titinius ' face is upward .
He is slain .
O Julius Caesar , thou art mighty yet !
Thy spirit walks abroad and turns our swords In our own proper entrails .
Are yet two Romans living such as these ?
The last of all the Romans , fare thee well !
I shall find time , Cassius , I shall find time .
Come , therefore , and to Thasos send his body .
Let us to the field .
Labio and Flavio , set our battles on .
Tis three o'clock , and , Romans , yet ere night We shall try fortune in a second fight .
What bastard doth not ?
Who will go with me ?
I will proclaim my name about the field .
I am the son of Marcus Cato , ho !
A foe to tyrants , and my country's friend .
I am the son of Marcus Cato , ho !
And I am Brutus , Marcus Brutus , I !
Brutus , my country's friend .
Know me for Brutus !
O young and noble Cato , art thou down ?
Only I yield to die .
There is so much that thou wilt kill me straight .
Kill Brutus , and be honored in his death .
We must not .
A noble prisoner !
Room , ho !
Tell Antony Brutus is ta'en .
I'll tell the news .
Where is he ?
Safe , Antony .
I dare assure thee that no enemy Shall ever take alive the noble Brutus .
The gods defend him from so great a shame !
The games are done and Caesar is returning .
As they pass by , pluck Casca by the sleeve , And he will , after his sour fashion , tell you What hath proceeded worthy note today .
I will do so .
But , look you , Cassius , The angry spot doth glow on Caesar's brow , And all the rest look like a chidden train .
Calphurnia's cheek is pale , and Cicero Looks with such ferret and such fiery eyes As we have seen him in the Capitol Being crossed in conference by some senators .
Casca will tell us what the matter is .
Antonio .
Caesar .
Come , poor remains of friends , rest on this rock .
Statilius showed the torchlight but , my lord , He came not back .
He is or ta'en or slain .
Sit thee down , Clitus .
Hark thee , Clitus .
What , I , my lord ?
No , not for all the world .
Peace then !
No words .
I'll rather kill myself .
Hark thee , Dardanius .
Shall I do such a deed ?
O Dardanius !
O Clitus !
Come hither , good Volumnius .
List a word .
What says my lord ?
At Sardis once , And this last night here in Philippi fields .
I know my hour is come .
Not so , my lord .
Nay , I am sure it is , Volumnius .
Thou seest the world , Volumnius , how it goes .
Our enemies have beat us to the pit .
It is more worthy to leap in ourselves Than tarry till they push us .
Good Volumnius , Thou know'st that we two went to school together .
Even for that our love of old , I prithee , Hold thou my sword hilts , whilst I run on it .
That's not an office for a friend , my lord .
Fly , fly , my lord .
There is no tarrying here .
Farewell to you. , And you. , And you , Volumnius .
Strato , thou hast been all this while asleep .
I shall have glory by this losing day More than Octavius and Mark Antony By this vile conquest shall attain unto .
So fare you well at once , for Brutus ' tongue Hath almost ended his life's history .
Night hangs upon mine eyes .
My bones would rest , That have but labored to attain this hour .
Fly , my lord , fly .
Hence .
I will follow .
I prithee , Strato , stay thou by thy lord .
Thou art a fellow of a good respect .
Thy life hath had some smatch of honor in it .
Hold then my sword and turn away thy face While I do run upon it .
Wilt thou , Strato ?
Give me your hand first .
Farewell , good Strato .
What man is that ?
Free from the bondage you are in , Messala .
All that served Brutus , I will entertain them .
Fellow , wilt thou bestow thy time with me ?
Ay , if Messala will prefer me to you .
Do so , good Messala .
How died my master , Strato ?
I held the sword and he did run on it .
Octavius , then take him to follow thee , That did the latest service to my master .
This was the noblest Roman of them all .
All the conspirators save only he Did that they did in envy of great Caesar .
He only in a general honest thought And common good to all , made one of them .
His life was gentle , and the elements So mixed in him that Nature might stand up And say to all the world , "This was a man." According to his virtue let us use him , With all respect and rites of burial .
Within my tent his bones tonight shall lie Most like a soldier , ordered honorably .
So call the field to rest , and let's away To part the glories of this happy day .
Ay , Casca .
Tell us what hath chanced today That Caesar looks so sad .
Why , you were with him , were you not ?
I should not then ask Casca what had chanced .
Why , there was a crown offered him ; and , being offered him , he put it by with the back of his hand , thus ; and then the people fell a-shouting .
What was the second noise for ?
Why , for that too .
They shouted thrice .
What was the last cry for ?
Why , for that too .
Was the crown offered him thrice ?
Ay , marry , was 't , and he put it by thrice , every time gentler than other , and at every putting-by mine honest neighbors shouted .
Who offered him the crown ?
Why , Antony .
Tell us the manner of it , gentle Casca .
I can as well be hanged as tell the manner of it .
I saw Mark Antony offer him a crown ( yet 'twas not a crown neither , 'twas one of these coronets ) and , as I told you , he put it by once , but , for all that , to my thinking , he would fain have had it .
Then he offered it to him again , then he put it by again , but , to my thinking , he was very loath to lay his fingers off it .
And then he offered it the third time .
And for mine own part , I durst not laugh for fear of opening my lips and receiving the bad air .
But soft , I pray you .
What , did Caesar swoon ?
He fell down in the marketplace , and foamed at mouth , and was speechless .
Tis very like .
He hath the falling sickness .
No , Caesar hath it not .
But you and I And honest Casca , we have the falling sickness .
I know not what you mean by that , but I am sure Caesar fell down .
What said he when he came unto himself ?
Marry , before he fell down , when he perceived the common herd was glad he refused the crown , he plucked me ope his doublet and offered them his throat to cut .
An I had been a man of any occupation , if I would not have taken him at a word , I would I might go to hell among the rogues .
And so he fell .
When he came to himself again , he said , if he had done or said anything amiss , he desired their worships to think it was his infirmity .
Three or four wenches where I stood cried , "Alas , good soul ! " and forgave him with all their hearts .
If Caesar had stabbed their mothers they would have done no less .
And after that he came thus sad away ?
Ay .
Hence !
Home , you idle creatures get you home !
Is this a holiday ?
Why , sir , a carpenter .
Where is thy leather apron and thy rule ?
What dost thou with thy best apparel on ?
Truly , sir , in respect of a fine workman , I am but , as you would say , a cobbler .
But what trade art thou ?
Answer me directly .
A trade , sir , that I hope I may use with a safe conscience , which is , indeed , sir , a mender of bad soles .
What trade , thou knave ?
Thou naughty knave , what trade ?
Nay , I beseech you , sir , be not out with me .
Yet , if you be out , sir , I can mend you .
What mean'st thou by that ?
Mend" me , thou saucy fellow ?
Did Cicero say anything ?
Ay , he spoke Greek .
To what effect ?
Nay , an I tell you that , I'll ne'er look you i ' th ' face again .
But those that understood him smiled at one another and shook their heads .
But , for mine own part , it was Greek to me .
I could tell you more news too .
Murellus and Flavius , for pulling scarfs off Caesar's images , are put to silence .
Fare you well .
There was more foolery yet , if I could remember it .
Will you sup with me tonight , Casca ?
No , I am promised forth .
Will you dine with me tomorrow ?
Ay , if I be alive and your mind hold and your dinner worth the eating .
Good .
I will expect you .
Do so .
Farewell both .
What a blunt fellow is this grown to be !
He was quick mettle when he went to school .
So is he now in execution Of any bold or noble enterprise , However he puts on this tardy form .
This rudeness is a sauce to his good wit , Which gives men stomach to digest his words With better appetite .
And so it is .
For this time I will leave you .
Tomorrow , if you please to speak with me , I will come home to you .
Or , if you will , Come home to me , and I will wait for you .
I will do so .
Till then , think of the world .
Well , Brutus , thou art noble .
Caesar doth bear me hard , but he loves Brutus .
If I were Brutus now and he were Cassius , He should not humor me .
I will this night , In several hands , in at his windows throw , As if they came from several citizens , Writings all tending to the great opinion That Rome holds of his name , wherein obscurely Caesar's ambition shall be glanced at .
Brought you Caesar home ?
O Cicero , I have seen tempests when the scolding winds Have rived the knotty oaks , and I have seen Th ' ambitious ocean swell and rage and foam To be exalted with the threatening clouds , But never till tonight , never till now , Did I go through a tempest dropping fire .
Either there is a civil strife in heaven , Or else the world , too saucy with the gods , Incenses them to send destruction .
Besides , I ha ' not since put up my sword , Against the Capitol I met a lion , Who glared upon me and went surly by , Without annoying me .
And there were drawn Upon a heap a hundred ghastly women , Transformed with their fear , who swore they saw Men all in fire walk up and down the streets .
And yesterday the bird of night did sit Even at noon-day upon the marketplace , Hooting and shrieking .
When these prodigies Do so conjointly meet , let not men say , "These are their reasons .
They are natural." For I believe they are portentous things Unto the climate that they point upon .
Indeed , it is a strange-disposed time .
But men may construe things after their fashion , Clean from the purpose of the things themselves .
Comes Caesar to the Capitol tomorrow ?
He doth , for he did bid Antonius Send word to you he would be there tomorrow .
Good night then , Casca .
This disturbed sky Is not to walk in .
A Roman .
Casca , by your voice .
Your ear is good .
Cassius , what night is this !
A very pleasing night to honest men .
Who ever knew the heavens menace so ?
Those that have known the earth so full of faults .
For my part , I have walked about the streets , Submitting me unto the perilous night , And , thus unbraced , Casca , as you see , Have bared my bosom to the thunder-stone .
And when the cross blue lightning seemed to open The breast of heaven , I did present myself Even in the aim and very flash of it .
But wherefore did you so much tempt the heavens ?
It is the part of men to fear and tremble When the most mighty gods by tokens send Such dreadful heralds to astonish us .
You are dull , Casca , and those sparks of life That should be in a Roman you do want , Or else you use not .
You look pale , and gaze , And put on fear , and cast yourself in wonder To see the strange impatience of the heavens .
A man no mightier than thyself or me In personal action , yet prodigious grown , And fearful as these strange eruptions are .
Let it be who it is .
Our yoke and sufferance show us womanish .
Indeed , they say the senators tomorrow Mean to establish Caesar as a king , And he shall wear his crown by sea and land In every place save here in Italy .
I know where I will wear this dagger then .
Cassius from bondage will deliver Cassius .
Therein , ye gods , you make the weak most strong .
Therein , ye gods , you tyrants do defeat .
Nor stony tower , nor walls of beaten brass , Nor airless dungeon , nor strong links of iron Can be retentive to the strength of spirit .
But life , being weary of these worldly bars , Never lacks power to dismiss itself .
If I know this , know all the world besides , That part of tyranny that I do bear I can shake off at pleasure .
So can I .
So every bondman in his own hand bears The power to cancel his captivity .
And why should Caesar be a tyrant then ?
Poor man !
I know he would not be a wolf But that he sees the Romans are but sheep .
He were no lion were not Romans hinds .
Those that with haste will make a mighty fire Begin it with weak straws .
But , O grief , Where hast thou led me ?
Then I know My answer must be made .
You speak to Casca , and to such a man That is no fleering telltale .
Hold , my hand .
Be factious for redress of all these griefs , And I will set this foot of mine as far As who goes farthest .
There's a bargain made .
Now know you , Casca , I have moved already Some certain of the noblest-minded Romans To undergo with me an enterprise Of honorable-dangerous consequence .
And I do know by this they stay for me In Pompey's porch .
Tis Cinna .
I do know him by his gait .
To find out you .
Who's that ?
Metellus Cimber ?
No , it is Casca , one incorporate To our attempts .
Am I not stayed for , Cinna ?
I am glad on 't .
What a fearful night is this !
There's two or three of us have seen strange sights .
Am I not stayed for ?
Tell me .
Yes , you are .
O Cassius , if you could But win the noble Brutus to our party , Be you content .
Good Cinna , take this paper , And look you lay it in the praetor's chair Where Brutus may but find it .
All this done , Repair to Pompey's porch , where you shall find us .
Is Decius Brutus and Trebonius there ?
All but Metellus Cimber , and he's gone To seek you at your house .
Well , I will hie , And so bestow these papers as you bade me .
That done , repair to Pompey's theatre .
Come , Casca , you and I will yet ere day See Brutus at his house .
Him and his worth and our great need of him You have right well conceited .
Let us go , For it is after midnight , and ere day We will awake him and be sure of him .
Awake , I say !
What , Lucius !
Called you , my lord ?
Get me a taper in my study , Lucius .
When it is lighted , come and call me here .
I will , my lord .
It must be by his death , and for my part I know no personal cause to spurn at him But for the general .
He would be crowned .
How that might change his nature , there's the question .
It is the bright day that brings forth the adder And that craves wary walking .
Crown him that , And then I grant we put a sting in him That at his will he may do danger with .
Why , sir , cobble you .
Thou art a cobbler , art thou ?
Truly , sir , all that I live by is with the awl .
I meddle with no tradesman's matters nor women's matters , but withal I am indeed , sir , a surgeon to old shoes .
When they are in great danger , I recover them .
As proper men as ever trod upon neat's leather have gone upon my handiwork .
But wherefore art not in thy shop today ?
Why dost thou lead these men about the streets ?
Truly , sir , to wear out their shoes to get myself into more work .
Wherefore rejoice ?
What conquest brings he home ?
What tributaries follow him to Rome To grace in captive bonds his chariot wheels ?
Th ' abuse of greatness is when it disjoins Remorse from power .
So Caesar may .
Then , lest he may , prevent .
And since the quarrel Will bear no color for the thing he is , Fashion it thus : that what he is , augmented , Would run to these and these extremities .
The taper burneth in your closet , sir .
Searching the window for a flint , I found This paper , thus sealed up , and I am sure It did not lie there when I went to bed .
Get you to bed again .
It is not day .
Is not tomorrow , boy , the ides of March ?
I know not , sir .
Look in the calendar and bring me word .
I will , sir .
Sir , March is wasted fifteen days .
Tis good .
Go to the gate .
Somebody knocks .
Since Cassius first did whet me against Caesar , I have not slept .
Is he alone ?
Do you know them ?
Let 'em enter .
O conspiracy , Shamest thou to show thy dangerous brow by night When evils are most free ?
O , then by day Where wilt thou find a cavern dark enough To mask thy monstrous visage ?
Hide it in smiles and affability .
I think we are too bold upon your rest .
Good morrow , Brutus .
Do we trouble you ?
I have been up this hour , awake all night .
Know I these men that come along with you ?
This is Trebonius .
He is welcome hither .
This , Decius Brutus .
He is welcome too .
This , Casca .
This , Cinna .
And this , Metellus Cimber .
They are all welcome .
What watchful cares do interpose themselves Betwixt your eyes and night ?
Shall I entreat a word ?
Here lies the east .
Doth not the day break here ?
No .
You shall confess that you are both deceived .
And let us swear our resolution .
No , not an oath .
So let high-sighted tyranny range on Till each man drop by lottery .
But if these , As I am sure they do , bear fire enough To kindle cowards and to steel with valor The melting spirits of women , then , countrymen , What need we any spur but our own cause To prick us to redress ?
What other bond Than secret Romans that have spoke the word And will not palter ?
And what other oath Than honesty to honesty engaged , That this shall be , or we will fall for it ?
Swear priests and cowards and men cautelous , Old feeble carrions and such suffering souls That welcome wrongs .
Unto bad causes swear Such creatures as men doubt .
But do not stain The even virtue of our enterprise , Nor th ' insuppressive mettle of our spirits , To think that or our cause or our performance Did need an oath , when every drop of blood That every Roman bears , and nobly bears , Is guilty of a several bastardy If he do break the smallest particle Of any promise that hath passed from him .
But what of Cicero ?
Shall we sound him ?
I think he will stand very strong with us .
Let us not leave him out .
No , by no means .
O , let us have him , for his silver hairs Will purchase us a good opinion And buy men's voices to commend our deeds .
It shall be said his judgment ruled our hands .
O , name him not .
Let us not break with him , For he will never follow anything That other men begin .
Then leave him out .
Indeed he is not fit .
Decius , well urged .
I think it is not meet Mark Antony , so well beloved of Caesar , Should outlive Caesar .
We shall find of him A shrewd contriver .
And , you know , his means , If he improve them , may well stretch so far As to annoy us all ; which to prevent , Let Antony and Caesar fall together .
Our course will seem too bloody , Caius Cassius , To cut the head off and then hack the limbs , Like wrath in death and envy afterwards , For Antony is but a limb of Caesar .
Let us be sacrificers but not butchers , Caius .
We all stand up against the spirit of Caesar , And in the spirit of men there is no blood .
Oh , that we then could come by Caesar's spirit And not dismember Caesar !
But , alas , Caesar must bleed for it .
And , gentle friends , Let's kill him boldly but not wrathfully .
Let's carve him as a dish fit for the gods , Not hew him as a carcass fit for hounds .
And let our hearts , as subtle masters do , Stir up their servants to an act of rage And after seem to chide 'em .
This shall make Our purpose necessary and not envious , Which so appearing to the common eyes , We shall be called purgers , not murderers .
If he love Caesar , all that he can do Is to himself : take thought and die for Caesar .
And that were much he should , for he is given To sports , to wildness and much company .
There is no fear in him .
Peace !
Count the clock .
The clock hath stricken three .
Tis time to part .
It may be , these apparent prodigies , The unaccustomed terror of this night , And the persuasion of his augurers May hold him from the Capitol today .
Never fear that .
If he be so resolved , I can o'ersway him .
For he loves to hear That unicorns may be betrayed with trees , And bears with glasses , elephants with holes , Lions with toils , and men with flatterers .
But when I tell him he hates flatterers , He says he does , being then most flattered .
Let me work .
For I can give his humor the true bent , And I will bring him to the Capitol .
Nay , we will all of us be there to fetch him .
By the eighth hour .
Is that the uttermost ?
Caius Ligarius doth bear Caesar hard , Who rated him for speaking well of Pompey .
I wonder none of you have thought of him .
Now , good Metellus , go along by him .
He loves me well , and I have given him reasons .
Send him but hither and I'll fashion him .
The morning comes upon 's .
We'll leave you , Brutus .
And , friends , disperse yourselves .
But all remember What you have said , and show yourselves true Romans .
Good gentlemen , look fresh and merrily .
And so good morrow to you every one .
Boy !
Lucius ! , Fast asleep ?
It is no matter .
Enjoy the honey-heavy dew of slumber .
Therefore thou sleep'st so sound .
Brutus , my lord .
Portia , what mean you ?
It is not for your health thus to commit Your weak condition to the raw , cold morning .
Nor for yours neither .
Y ' have ungently , Brutus , Stole from my bed .
And yesternight , at supper , You suddenly arose and walked about , Musing and sighing , with your arms across , And when I asked you what the matter was , You stared upon me with ungentle looks .
I urged you further , then you scratched your head And too impatiently stamped with your foot .
Yet I insisted ; yet you answered not , But with an angry wafture of your hand Gave sign for me to leave you .
Dear my lord , Make me acquainted with your cause of grief .
And do you now strew flowers in his way That comes in triumph over Pompey's blood ?
Be gone !
Run to your houses , fall upon your knees , Pray to the gods to intermit the plague That needs must light on this ingratitude .
Go , go , good countrymen , and for this fault , Assemble all the poor men of your sort , Draw them to Tiber banks , and weep your tears Into the channel till the lowest stream Do kiss the most exalted shores of all .
Go you down that way towards the Capitol .
This way will I. Disrobe the images If you do find them decked with ceremonies .
May we do so ?
I'll about And drive away the vulgar from the streets .
So do you too , where you perceive them thick .
These growing feathers plucked from Caesar's wing Will make him fly an ordinary pitch , Who else would soar above the view of men And keep us all in servile fearfulness .
I am not well in health , and that is all .
Brutus is wise , and were he not in health , He would embrace the means to come by it .
Why , so I do .
Good Portia , go to bed .
Is Brutus sick ?
And is it physical To walk unbraced and suck up the humors Of the dank morning ?
What , is Brutus sick , And will he steal out of his wholesome bed , To dare the vile contagion of the night And tempt the rheumy and unpurged air To add unto his sickness ?
Kneel not , gentle Portia .
You are my true and honorable wife , As dear to me as are the ruddy drops That visit my sad heart .
If this were true , then should I know this secret .
I grant I am a woman , but withal A woman that Lord Brutus took to wife .
I grant I am a woman , but withal A woman well-reputed , Cato's daughter .
Think you I am no stronger than my sex , Being so fathered and so husbanded ?
Tell me your counsels .
I will not disclose 'em .
I have made strong proof of my constancy , Giving myself a voluntary wound Here in the thigh .
Can I bear that with patience , And not my husband's secrets ?
O ye gods , Render me worthy of this noble wife !
Hark , hark !
One knocks .
Leave me with haste .
Lucius , who's that knocking ?
He is a sick man that would speak with you .
Would you were not sick !
I am not sick if Brutus have in hand Any exploit worthy the name of honor .
Such an exploit have I in hand , Ligarius , Had you a healthful ear to hear of it .
A piece of work that will make sick men whole .
But are not some whole that we must make sick ?
That must we also .
What it is , my Caius , I shall unfold to thee as we are going To whom it must be done .
Follow me , then .
Nor heaven nor earth have been at peace tonight .
Thrice hath Calphurnia in her sleep cried out , "Help , ho !
They murder Caesar ! " , Who's within ?
My lord .
Go bid the priests do present sacrifice And bring me their opinions of success .
I will , my lord .
What mean you , Caesar ?
Think you to walk forth ?
You shall not stir out of your house today .
Caesar shall forth .
The things that threatened me Ne'er looked but on my back .
When they shall see The face of Caesar , they are vanished .
Caesar , I never stood on ceremonies , Yet now they fright me .
There is one within , Besides the things that we have heard and seen , Recounts most horrid sights seen by the watch .
A lioness hath whelped in the streets , And graves have yawned and yielded up their dead .
Fierce fiery warriors fought upon the clouds In ranks and squadrons and right form of war , Which drizzled blood upon the Capitol .
O Caesar !
These things are beyond all use , And I do fear them .
What can be avoided Whose end is purposed by the mighty gods ?
Yet Caesar shall go forth , for these predictions Are to the world in general as to Caesar .
When beggars die there are no comets seen .
The heavens themselves blaze forth the death of princes .
Cowards die many times before their deaths .
The valiant never taste of death but once .
Of all the wonders that I yet have heard , It seems to me most strange that men should fear , Seeing that death , a necessary end , Will come when it will come .
What say the augurers ?
They would not have you to stir forth today .
Plucking the entrails of an offering forth , They could not find a heart within the beast .
The gods do this in shame of cowardice .
Caesar should be a beast without a heart If he should stay at home today for fear .
No , Caesar shall not .
We are two lions littered in one day , And I the elder and more terrible .
And Caesar shall go forth .
Alas , my lord , Your wisdom is consumed in confidence .
Do not go forth today .
Call it my fear That keeps you in the house , and not your own .
We'll send Mark Antony to the senate house , And he shall say you are not well today .
Mark Antony shall say I am not well , And for thy humor I will stay at home .
Here's Decius Brutus .
He shall tell them so .
Caesar , all hail !
Good morrow , worthy Caesar .
I come to fetch you to the senate house .
And you are come in very happy time To bear my greeting to the senators And tell them that I will not come today .
Shall Caesar send a lie ?
Have I in conquest stretched mine arm so far To be afraid to tell graybeards the truth ?
Decius , go tell them Caesar will not come .
Most mighty Caesar , let me know some cause , Lest I be laughed at when I tell them so .
The cause is in my will .
I will not come .
That is enough to satisfy the senate .
But for your private satisfaction , Because I love you , I will let you know .
Calphurnia here , my wife , stays me at home .
And these does she apply for warnings and portents And evils imminent , and on her knee Hath begged that I will stay at home today .
This dream is all amiss interpreted .
It was a vision fair and fortunate .
Your statue spouting blood in many pipes , In which so many smiling Romans bathed , Signifies that from you great Rome shall suck Reviving blood , and that great men shall press For tinctures , stains , relics , and cognizance .
This by Calphurnia's dream is signified .
And this way have you well expounded it .
I have , when you have heard what I can say .
And know it now : the senate have concluded To give this day a crown to mighty Caesar .
If you shall send them word you will not come , Their minds may change .
How foolish do your fears seem now , Calphurnia !
I am ashamed I did yield to them .
Give me my robe , for I will go .
And look , where Publius is come to fetch me .
Good morrow , Caesar .
Welcome , Publius .
Good morrow , Casca. , Caius Ligarius , Caesar was ne'er so much your enemy As that same ague which hath made you lean .
What is 't o'clock ?
Caesar , 'tis strucken eight .
I thank you for your pains and courtesy .
So to most noble Caesar .
I am to blame to be thus waited for .
Now , Cinna. , Now , Metellus. , What , Trebonius , I have an hour's talk in store for you .
Remember that you call on me today .
Be near me , that I may remember you .
Caesar , I will .
Good friends , go in and taste some wine with me .
And we , like friends , will straightway go together .
Calphurnia !
Peace , ho !
Caesar speaks .
Calphurnia !
Here , my lord .
Caesar , my lord .
I shall remember .
When Caesar says , "do this , " it is performed .
Set on , and leave no ceremony out .
Caesar !
Caesar , beware of Brutus .
Take heed of Cassius .
Come not near Casca .
Have an eye to Cinna .
Trust not Trebonius .
Mark well Metellus Cimber .
Decius Brutus loves thee not .
Thou hast wronged Caius Ligarius .
There is but one mind in all these men , and it is bent against Caesar .
If thou beest not immortal , look about you .
Security gives way to conspiracy .
The mighty gods defend thee !
Thy lover , Artemidorus" Here will I stand till Caesar pass along , And as a suitor will I give him this .
If thou read this , O Caesar , thou mayst live .
If not , the Fates with traitors do contrive .
I prithee , boy , run to the senate house .
Stay not to answer me , but get thee gone .
I would have had thee there and here again Ere I can tell thee what thou shouldst do there .
Madam , what should I do ?
Run to the Capitol , and nothing else ?
And so return to you , and nothing else ?
Yes , bring me word , boy , if thy lord look well , For he went sickly forth .
And take good note What Caesar doth , what suitors press to him .
Hark , boy !
What noise is that ?
I hear none , madam .
Prithee , listen well .
Sooth , madam , I hear nothing .
Come hither , fellow .
Which way hast thou been ?
At mine own house , good lady .
What is 't o'clock ?
About the ninth hour , lady .
Is Caesar yet gone to the Capitol ?
Madam , not yet .
I go to take my stand To see him pass on to the Capitol .
Thou hast some suit to Caesar , hast thou not ?
That I have , lady .
If it will please Caesar To be so good to Caesar as to hear me , I shall beseech him to befriend himself .
Why , know'st thou any harm's intended towards him ?
None that I know will be ; much that I fear may chance .
Good morrow to you .
Here the street is narrow .
The throng that follows Caesar at the heels , Of senators , of praetors , common suitors , Will crowd a feeble man almost to death .
I'll get me to a place more void , and there Speak to great Caesar as he comes along .
I must go in .
Ay , Caesar , but not gone .
O Caesar , read mine first , for mine's a suit That touches Caesar nearer .
Read it , great Caesar .
What touches us ourself shall be last served .
Delay not , Caesar .
Read it instantly .
What , is the fellow mad ?
Weapons , arms ?
What's the matter here ?
Keep peace , upon your lives .
He dies that strikes again .
What is the matter ?
The messengers from our sister and the king .
What is your difference ?
Speak .
I am scarce in breath , my lord .
A tailor made thee .
Thou art a strange fellow .
A tailor make a man ?
Ay , a tailor , sir .
A stone-cutter or painter could not have made him so ill though they had been but two years o ' th ' trade .
Speak yet .
Peace , sirrah !
You beastly knave , know you no reverence ?
Yes , sir , but anger hath a privilege .
Why art thou angry ?
Smile you my speeches as I were a fool ?
Why , art thou mad , old fellow ?
Why dost thou call him "knave" ?
What's his offense ?
His countenance likes me not .
No more perchance does mine , nor his , nor hers .
This is some fellow , Who , having been praised for bluntness , doth affect A saucy roughness and constrains the garb Quite from his nature .
He can not flatter , he .
An honest mind and plain , he must speak truth .
An they will take it , so .
If not , he's plain .
Sir , in good faith , or in sincere verity , Under th ' allowance of your great aspect , Whose influence , like the wreath of radiant fire On flickering Phoebus ' front , What mean'st by this ?
To go out of my dialect , which you discommend so much .
I know , sir , I am no flatterer .
I never gave him any .
None of these rogues and cowards But Ajax is their fool .
Call not your stocks for me .
I serve the king , On whose employment I was sent to you .
You shall do small respect , show too bold malice Against the grace and person of my master , Stocking his messenger .
Fetch forth the stocks !
As I have life and honor , there shall he sit till noon .
Till noon ?
Till night , my lord , and all night too .
Why , madam , if I were your father's dog , You should not use me so .
Sir , being his knave , I will .
This is a fellow of the selfsame color Our sister speaks of. , Come , bring away the stocks !
Let me beseech your grace not to do so .
His fault is much , and the good king his master Will check him for 't .
The king his master needs must take it ill , That he , so slightly valued in his messenger , Should have him thus restrained .
I'll answer that .
My sister may receive it much more worse To have her gentleman abused , assaulted For following her affairs. , Put in his legs .
I am sorry for thee , friend .
I'll entreat for thee .
Pray you do not , sir .
A good man's fortune may grow out at heels .
Give you good morrow .
The duke's to blame in this .
Twill be ill taken .
Obey you , love you , and most honor you .
Haply when I shall wed That lord whose hand must take my plight shall carry Half my love with him , half my care and duty .
Sure , I shall never marry like my sisters , To love my father all .
But goes thy heart with this ?
Ay , good my lord .
So young and so untender ?
So young , my lord , and true .
Let it be so .
Thy truth then be thy dower .
The barbarous Scythian , Or he that makes his generation messes To gorge his appetite , shall to my bosom Be as well neighbored , pitied , and relieved As thou my sometime daughter .
Good my liege , Peace , Kent .
I heard myself proclaimed , And by the happy hollow of a tree Escaped the hunt .
No port is free , no place That guard and most unusual vigilance Does not attend my taking .
My face I'll grime with filth , Blanket my loins , elf all my hair in knots , And with presented nakedness outface The winds and persecutions of the sky .
Poor Turlygod ! " "Poor Tom ! " , That's something yet .
Edgar I nothing am .
Tis strange that they should so depart from home , And not send back my messenger .
As I learned , The night before there was no purpose in them Of this remove .
Ha !
Makest thou this shame thy pastime ?
No , my lord .
Ha , ha !
Look , he wears cruel garters .
Horses are tied by the heads , dogs and bears by the neck , monkeys by the loins , and men by the legs .
It is both he and she : Your son and daughter .
No .
Yes .
No , no , they would not .
Yes , they have .
By Jupiter , I swear "No." By Juno , I swear "Ay." They durst not do 't .
They could not , would not do 't .
Tis worse than murder To do upon respect such violent outrage .
My lord , when at their home I did commend your highness ' letters to them .
He raised the house with loud and coward cries .
Your son and daughter found this trespass worth The shame which here it suffers .
Fathers that wear rags Do make their children blind .
But fathers that bear bags Shall see their children kind .
Fortune , that arrant whore , Ne'er turns the key to th ' poor .
But for all this thou shalt have as many dolors for thy daughters as thou canst tell in a year .
O , how this mother swells up toward my heart !
With the earl , sir , here within .
Follow me not .
Stay here .
Made you no more offense but what you speak of ?
None .
How chance the king comes with so small a train ?
An thou hadst been set i ' th ' stocks for that question , thou'dst well deserved it .
Why , Fool ?
We'll set thee to school to an ant to teach thee there's no laboring i ' th ' winter .
All that follow their noses are led by their eyes but blind men , and there's not a nose among twenty but can smell him that's stinking .
Let go thy hold when a great wheel runs down a hill , lest it break thy neck with following it .
But the great one that goes up the hill , let him draw thee after .
When a wise man gives thee better counsel , give me mine again .
I would have none but knaves follow it since a fool gives it .
That sir which serves and seeks for gain , And follows but for form , Will pack when it begins to rain And leave thee in the storm .
But I will tarry .
The fool will stay .
And let the wise man fly .
Where learned you this , Fool ?
Not i ' th ' stocks , fool .
Deny to speak with me ?
They are sick ?
They are weary ?
The images of revolt and flying off .
My dear lord , You know the fiery quality of the duke , How unremoveable and fixed he is In his own course .
Vengeance , plague , death , confusion !
Fiery" ?
What "quality" ?
Why , Gloucester , Gloucester , I'd speak with the Duke of Cornwall and his wife .
Well , my good lord , I have informed them so .
Informed them" ?
Dost thou understand me , man ?
Ay , my good lord .
The king would speak with Cornwall .
Are they "informed" of this ?
My breath and blood !
Fiery" ?
The "fiery" duke ?
Tell the hot duke that Lear , No , but not yet .
Maybe he is not well .
I would have all well betwixt you .
O me , my heart , my rising heart !
But down .
Good morrow to you both .
Hail to your grace .
I am glad to see your highness .
Regan , I think you are .
I know what reason I have to think so : if thou shouldst not be glad , I would divorce me from thy mother's tomb , Sepulchring an adultress .
Beloved Regan , Thy sister's naught .
O Regan , she hath tied Sharp-toothed unkindness , like a vulture , here .
I pray you , sir , take patience .
Say , how is that ?
I can not think my sister in the least Would fail her obligation .
If , sir , perchance She have restrained the riots of your followers , 'T is on such ground and to such wholesome end As clears her from all blame .
My curses on her !
O sir , you are old .
Nature in you stands on the very verge Of his confine .
You should be ruled and led By some discretion that discerns your state Better than you yourself .
Therefore I pray you That to our sister you do make return .
Say you have wronged her , sir .
Ask her forgiveness ?
On my knees I beg That you'll vouchsafe me raiment , bed , and food." Good sir , no more .
These are unsightly tricks .
Return you to my sister .
Fie , sir , fie !
You nimble lightnings , dart your blinding flames Into her scornful eyes !
Infect her beauty , You fen-sucked fogs drawn by the powerful sun , To fall and blister !
O the blessed gods !
So will you wish on me when the rash mood is on .
Her eyes are fierce , but thine Do comfort and not burn .
Thy half o ' th ' kingdom hast thou not forgot , Wherein I thee endowed .
Good sir , to the purpose .
Hence , and avoid my sight ! , So be my grave my peace as here I give Her father's heart from her. , Call France .
Call Burgundy. , Cornwall and Albany , With my two daughters ' dowers digest this third .
Let pride , which she calls plainness , marry her .
Royal Lear , Whom I have ever honored as my king , Loved as my father , as my master followed , As my great patron thought on in my prayers , The bow is bent and drawn .
Let it fall rather , though the fork invade The region of my heart .
Be Kent unmannerly When Lear is mad .
What wouldst thou do , old man ?
Think'st thou that duty shall have dread to speak When power to flattery bows ?
To plainness honor's bound When majesty falls to folly .
What trumpet's that ?
I know 't , my sister's .
This approves her letter That she would soon be here .
This is a slave whose easy borrowed pride Dwells in the fickle grace of her he follows. , Out , varlet , from my sight !
What means your grace ?
Who stocked my servant ?
Regan , I have good hope Thou didst not know on 't. , Who comes here ?
O Regan , wilt thou take her by the hand ?
How have I offended ?
I set him there , sir , but his own disorders Deserved much less advancement .
You !
Did you ?
I pray you , father , being weak , seem so .
If till the expiration of your month , You will return and sojourn with my sister , Dismissing half your train , come then to me .
I am now from home , and out of that provision Which shall be needful for your entertainment .
Return to her , and fifty men dismissed ?
Return with her ?
Why , the hot-blooded France that dowerless took Our youngest born , I could as well be brought To knee his throne , and , squirelike , pension beg To keep base life afoot .
Return with her ?
Persuade me rather to be slave and sumpter To this detested groom .
At your choice , sir .
Now , I prithee , daughter , do not make me mad .
I will not trouble thee , my child .
We'll no more meet , no more see one another .
But yet thou art my flesh , my blood , my daughter , Or rather a disease that's in my flesh , Which I must needs call mine .
Thou art a boil , A plague-sore or embossed carbuncle In my corrupted blood .
But I'll not chide thee .
I do not bid the thunder-bearer shoot , Nor tell tales of thee to high-judging Jove .
Mend when thou canst .
Be better at thy leisure .
I can be patient .
I can stay with Regan , I and my hundred knights .
Not altogether so , sir .
I looked not for you yet , nor am provided For your fit welcome .
Give ear , sir , to my sister .
For those that mingle reason with your passion Must be content to think you old , and so , But she knows what she does .
I dare avouch it , sir .
How , in one house , Should many people under two commands Hold amity ?
Tis hard ; almost impossible .
Why might not you , my lord , receive attendance From those that she calls servants , or from mine ?
Why not , my lord ?
If then they chanced to slack you , We could control them .
If you will come to me , For now I spy a danger , I entreat you To bring but five and twenty .
To no more Will I give place or notice .
I gave you all , And in good time you gave it .
Made you my guardians , my depositaries , But kept a reservation to be followed With such a number .
What , must I come to you With five and twenty , Regan ?
Said you so ?
And speak 't again , my lord .
No more with me .
Not being the worst Stands in some rank of praise .
Hear me , my lord .
What need you five and twenty , ten , or five To follow in a house where twice so many Have a command to tend you ?
What need one ?
O , reason not the need !
Thou art a lady .
If only to go warm were gorgeous , Why , nature needs not what thou gorgeous wear'st , Which scarcely keeps thee warm .
But , for true need , You heavens , give me that patience , patience I need .
You see me here , you gods , a poor old man , As full of grief as age , wretched in both .
If it be you that stir these daughters ' hearts Against their father , fool me not so much To bear it tamely .
No , you unnatural hags ,
I will have such revenges on you both That all the world shall , I will do such things , What they are yet I know not , but they shall be The terrors of the earth .
You think I'll weep ?
No , I'll not weep .
I have full cause of weeping , but this heart Shall break into a hundred thousand flaws , Or ere I'll weep. , O Fool , I shall go mad !
Let us withdraw .
Twill be a storm .
This house is little .
The old man and his people Can not be well bestowed .
Tis his own blame .
Hath put himself from rest , And must needs taste his folly .
So am I purposed .
Where is my lord of Gloucester ?
Followed the old man forth .
He is returned .
Whither is he going ?
He calls to horse , but will I know not whither .
Tis best to give him way .
He leads himself .
For many miles about There's scarce a bush .
O sir , to wilful men , The injuries that they themselves procure Must be their schoolmasters .
Shut up your doors .
He is attended with a desperate train .
And what they may incense him to , being apt To have his ear abused , wisdom bids fear .
Shut up your doors , my lord .
Tis a wild night .
My Regan counsels well .
Come out o ' th ' storm .
Who's there , besides foul weather ?
One minded like the weather , most unquietly .
I know you .
Where's the king ?
Contending with the fretful elements .
Bids the winds blow the earth into the sea Or swell the curled water 'bove the main , That things might change or cease .
Tears his white hair , Which the impetuous blasts , with eyeless rage , Catch in their fury and make nothing of .
Strives in his little world of man to outscorn The to-and-fro-conflicting wind and rain .
This night , wherein the cub-drawn bear would couch , The lion and the belly-pinched wolf Keep their fur dry , unbonneted he runs , And bids what will take all .
But who is with him ?
None but the fool , who labors to outjest His heart-struck injuries .
Sir , I do know you , And dare upon the warrant of my note Commend a dear thing to you .
From France there comes a power Into this scattered kingdom , who already , Wise in our negligence , have secret feet In some of our best ports and are at point To show their open banner .
Now to you .
I am a gentleman of blood and breeding , And from some knowledge and assurance offer This office to you .
I will talk further with you .
Give me your hand .
Have you no more to say ?
Rage , blow !
You cataracts and hurricanoes , spout Till you have drenched our steeples , drowned the cocks !
You sulfurous and thought-executing fires , Vaunt-couriers of oak-cleaving thunderbolts , Singe my white head !
And thou , all-shaking thunder , Smite flat the thick rotundity o ' th ' world , Crack nature's molds , all germens spill at once That make ingrateful man !
O nuncle , court holy water in a dry house is better than this rainwater out o ' door .
Good nuncle , in , and ask thy daughters blessing .
Here's a night pities neither wise man nor fool .
Rumble thy bellyful !
Spit , fire !
Spout , rain !
Nor rain , wind , thunder , fire are my daughters .
I tax not you , you elements , with unkindness .
Why then , let fall Your horrible pleasure .
Here I stand , your slave , A poor , infirm , weak , and despised old man .
He that has a house to put 's head in has a good headpiece .
Answer my life my judgment , Thy youngest daughter does not love thee least , Nor are those empty-hearted whose low sound Reverbs no hollowness .
Kent , on thy life , no more .
Out of my sight !
See better , Lear , and let me still remain The true blank of thine eye .
Now , by Apollo , Now , by Apollo , King , Thou swear'st thy gods in vain .
O vassal !
Miscreant !
Dear sir , forbear !
Hear me , recreant !
For there was never yet fair woman but she made mouths in a glass .
No , I will be the pattern of all patience .
I will say nothing .
Who's there ?
Marry , here's grace and a codpiece , that's a wise man and a fool .
Let the great gods That keep this dreadful pudder o'er our heads Find out their enemies now .
Some friendship will it lend you 'gainst the tempest .
Repose you there , while I to this hard house , More harder than the stones whereof 'tis raised , Which even but now , demanding after you , Denied me to come in , return , and force Their scanted courtesy .
My wits begin to turn. , Come on , my boy .
True , my good boy. , Come , bring us to this hovel .
I'll speak a prophecy ere I go .
Then comes the time , who lives to see 't , That going shall be used with feet .
This prophecy Merlin shall make , for I live before his time .
Alack , alack , Edmund , I like not this unnatural dealing .
When I desire their leave that I might pity him , they took from me the use of mine own house , charged me on pain of their perpetual displeasure neither to speak of him , entreat for him , nor any way sustain him .
Most savage and unnatural !
Go to , say you nothing .
There's a division betwixt the dukes .
Tis dangerous to be spoken .
I have locked the letter in my closet .
These injuries the king now bears will be revenged home .
There's part of a power already footed .
We must incline to the king .
I will look him and privily relieve him .
Go you and maintain talk with the duke , that my charity be not of him perceived .
If he ask for me , I am ill and gone to bed .
Though I die for it , as no less is threatened me , the king my old master must be relieved .
There is some strange thing toward , Edmund .
Pray you , be careful .
This courtesy , forbid thee , shall the duke Instantly know , and of that letter too .
The younger rises when the old doth fall .
Here is the place , my lord .
Good my lord , enter .
The tyranny of the open night's too rough For nature to endure .
Let me alone .
Good my lord , enter here .
Wilt break my heart ?
I had rather break mine own .
Good my lord , enter .
Thou think'st 'tis much that this contentious storm Invades us to the skin .
So 'tis to thee .
But where the greater malady is fixed The lesser is scarce felt .
Thou'dst shun a bear , But if thy flight lay toward the raging sea Thou'dst meet the bear i ' th ' mouth .
When the mind's free , The body's delicate .
The tempest in my mind Doth from my senses take all feeling else Save what beats there , filial ingratitude .
Is it not as this mouth should tear this hand For lifting food to 't ?
But I will punish home .
No , I will weep no more .
In such a night To shut me out !
Pour on , I will endure .
In such a night as this !
O Regan , Goneril , Your old kind father , whose frank heart gave all , Oh , that way madness lies .
Let me shun that .
No more of that .
Good my lord , enter here .
Prithee , go in thyself .
Seek thine own ease .
This tempest will not give me leave to ponder On things would hurt me more .
But I'll go in .
Expose thyself to feel what wretches feel , That thou mayst shake the superflux to them And show the heavens more just .
Come not in here , nuncle .
Here's a spirit .
Help me , help me !
Give me thy hand .
Who's there ?
A spirit , a spirit .
He says his name's Poor Tom .
What art thou that dost grumble there i ' th ' straw ?
Come forth .
Away !
The foul fiend follows me !
Through the sharp hawthorn blows the cold wind .
Hum !
Go to thy cold bed and warm thee .
Didst thou give all to thy two daughters , and art thou come to this ?
Bless thy five wits .
Tom's a-cold .
Oh , do-de , do-de , do-de .
Bless thee from whirlwinds , star-blasting , and taking !
Do Poor Tom some charity , whom the foul fiend vexes .
There could I have him now , and there , and there again , and there .
What , has his daughters brought him to this pass ? , Couldst thou save nothing ?
Wouldst thou give 'em all ?
Nay , he reserved a blanket , else we had been all shamed .
Now all the plagues that in the pendulous air Hang fated o'er men's faults light on thy daughters !
He hath no daughters , sir .
Death , traitor !
Nothing could have subdued nature To such a lowness but his unkind daughters .
Is it the fashion that discarded fathers Should have thus little mercy on their flesh ?
Twas this flesh begot Those pelican daughters .
This cold night will turn us all to fools and madmen .
Take heed o ' th ' foul fiend .
Obey thy parents , keep thy word's justice , swear not , commit not with man's sworn spouse , set not thy sweet heart on proud array .
Tom's a- cold .
What hast thou been ?
Wine loved I deeply , dice dearly , and in woman outparamoured the Turk .
Still through the hawthorn blows the cold wind , says , "Suum , mun , nonny." Dauphin my boy , my boy , cessez .
Thou art the thing itself .
Unaccommodated man is no more but such a poor , bare , forked animal as thou art. , Off , off , you lendings !
Unbutton here .
Prithee , nuncle , be contented .
Tis a naughty night to swim in .
Now a little fire in a wild field were like an old lecher's heart , a small spark , all the rest on 's body cold .
Look , here comes a walking fire .
This is the foul fiend Flibbertigibbet .
He begins at curfew and walks till the first cock .
And aroint thee , witch , aroint thee !
How fares your grace ?
Who's there ?
What is 't you seek ?
What are you there ?
Your names ?
Peace , Smulkin .
Modo he's called , and Mahu .
Poor Tom's a-cold .
Go in with me .
My duty can not suffer To obey in all your daughters ' hard commands .
Though their injunction be to bar my doors And let this tyrannous night take hold upon you , Yet have I ventured to come seek you out And bring you where both fire and food is ready .
First let me talk with this philosopher. ,
Away !
By Jupiter , This shall not be revoked .
Why , fare thee well , King .
Here's France and Burgundy , my noble lord .
My lord of Burgundy .
We first address towards you , who with this king Hath rivaled for our daughter .
Let me ask you one word in private .
Canst thou blame him ?
His daughters seek his death .
Ah , that good Kent , He said it would be thus , poor banished man .
Thou say'st the king grows mad .
I'll tell thee , friend , I am almost mad myself .
I had a son , Now outlawed from my blood .
He sought my life , But lately , very late .
I loved him , friend , No father his son dearer .
What a night's this !
O , cry your mercy , sir. , Tom's a-cold .
Keep thee warm .
Come let's in all .
This way , my lord .
Come , good Athenian .
I will have my revenge ere I depart his house .
How , my lord , I may be censured , that nature thus gives way to loyalty , something fears me to think of .
I now perceive it was not altogether your brother's evil disposition made him seek his death , but a provoking merit set awork by a reprovable badness in himself .
How malicious is my fortune , that I must repent to be just !
Go with me to the duchess .
If the matter of this paper be certain , you have mighty business in hand .
True or false , it hath made thee Earl of Gloucester .
I will lay trust upon thee , and thou shalt find a dearer father in my love .
Here is better than the open air .
Take it thankfully .
I will piece out the comfort with what addition I can .
I will not be long from you .
All the power of his wits have given way to his impatience .
The gods reward your kindness !
A king , a king !
No , he's a yeoman that has a gentleman to his son , for he's a mad yeoman that sees his son a gentleman before him .
To have a thousand with red burning spits Come hissing in upon 'em !
The foul fiend bites my back .
It shall be done .
The foul fiend haunts Poor Tom in the voice of a nightingale .
Hoppedance cries in Tom's belly for two white herring .
Croak not , black angel .
I have no food for thee .
Sit you too .
Let us deal justly .
I here take my oath before this honorable assembly , she kicked the poor king her father .
Come hither , mistress .
Is your name Goneril ?
She can not deny it .
And here's another , whose warped looks proclaim What store her heart is made on .
Stop her there !
Arms , arms , sword , fire , corruption in the place !
False justicer , why hast thou let her 'scape ?
They'll mar my counterfeiting .
The little dogs and all , Tray , Blanch , and Sweetheart , see , they bark at me .
Tom will throw his head at them. , Avaunt , you curs !
Tooth that poisons if it bite , Mastiff , greyhound , mongrel grim ,
Hound or spaniel , brach or him , Bobtail tyke or trundle-tail , Tom will make them weep and wail .
For with throwing thus my head , Dogs leap the hatch , and all are fled .
Be thy mouth or black or white , Do-de , de-de .
Cessez !
Come , march to wakes and fairs and market towns .
Poor Tom , thy horn is dry .
Is there any cause in nature that makes these hard hearts ?
Now , good my lord , lie here and rest awhile .
Make no noise , make no noise .
Draw the curtains , so , so , so .
We'll go to supper i ' th ' morning .
So , so , so .
And I'll go to bed at noon .
Here , sir , but trouble him not .
His wits are gone .
Good friend , I prithee , take him in thy arms .
There is a litter ready .
Come , help to bear thy master .
Come , come , away .
When we our betters see bearing our woes , We scarcely think our miseries our foes .
Who alone suffers , suffers most i ' th ' mind , Leaving free things and happy shows behind .
But then the mind much sufferance doth o'erskip When grief hath mates and bearing fellowship .
Tom , away !
What will hap more tonight , safe 'scape the king !
Lurk , lurk .
Hang him instantly .
Pluck out his eyes .
Leave him to my displeasure. , Edmund , keep you our sister company .
The revenges we are bound to take upon your traitorous father are not fit for your beholding .
Advise the duke where you are going , to a most festinate preparation .
We are bound to the like .
Our posts shall be swift and intelligent betwixt us. , Farewell , dear sister .
How now ?
Where's the king ?
My lord of Gloucester hath conveyed him hence .
Some five or six and thirty of his knights , Hot questrists after him , met him at gate , Who with some other of the lord's dependants Are gone with him towards Dover , where they boast To have well-armed friends .
Get horses for your mistress .
Farewell , sweet lord , and sister .
Edmund , farewell .
Go seek the traitor Gloucester .
Pinion him like a thief , bring him before us .
Ingrateful fox , 'tis he .
Bind fast his corky arms .
What mean your graces ?
Good my friends , consider You are my guests .
Do me no foul play , friends .
Bind him , I say .
Most royal majesty , I crave no more than hath your highness offered .
Nor will you tender less .
Sir , there she stands .
I know no answer .
Sir , will you , with those infirmities she owes , Unfriended , new adopted to our hate , Dowered with our curse and strangered with our oath , Take her or leave her ?
Then leave her , sir , for by the power that made me , I tell you all her wealth .
Hard , hard. , O filthy traitor !
Unmerciful lady as you are , I'm none .
To this chair bind him. , Villain , thou shalt find , By the kind gods , 'tis most ignobly done To pluck me by the beard .
So white , and such a traitor ?
Naughty lady , These hairs which thou dost ravish from my chin Will quicken and accuse thee .
I am your host .
With robbers ' hands my hospitable favors You should not ruffle thus .
What will you do ?
Come , sir , what letters had you late from France ?
Be simple-answered , for we know the truth .
And what confederacy have you with the traitors Late footed in the kingdom ?
To whose hands You have sent the lunatic king .
Speak .
I have a letter guessingly set down , Which came from one that's of a neutral heart , And not from one opposed .
Cunning .
And false .
Where hast thou sent the king ?
To Dover .
Wherefore to Dover ?
Wast thou not charged at peril , Wherefore to Dover ? , Let him first answer that .
I am tied to th ' stake , and I must stand the course .
Wherefore to Dover , sir ?
Because I would not see thy cruel nails Pluck out his poor old eyes , nor thy fierce sister In his anointed flesh stick boarish fangs .
The sea , with such a storm as his bare head In hell-black night endured , would have buoyed up , And quenched the stelled fires .
Yet poor old heart , he holp the heavens to rain .
If wolves had at thy gate howled that stern time , Thou shouldst have said , "Good porter , turn the key , " All cruels else subscribed .
But I shall see The winged vengeance overtake such children .
See" 't shalt thou never. , Fellows , hold the chair. , Upon these eyes of thine I'll set my foot .
He that will think to live till he be old , Give me some help !
O cruel !
O you gods !
One side will mock another , th ' other too .
But better service have I never done you Than now to bid you hold .
How now , you dog ?
If you did wear a beard upon your chin , I'd shake it on this quarrel .
What do you mean ?
Nay then , come on , and take the chance of anger .
Oh , I am slain ! , My lord , you have one eye left To see some mischief on him .
Oh !
Where is thy luster now ?
Where's my son Edmund ?
Out , treacherous villain !
Thou call'st on him that hates thee .
It was he That made the overture of thy treasons to us , Who is too good to pity thee .
O my follies !
Then Edgar was abused .
Go thrust him out at gates , and let him smell His way to Dover .
I have received a hurt .
Follow me , lady. , Turn out that eyeless villain .
Throw this slave Upon the dunghill. , Regan , I bleed apace .
Untimely comes this hurt .
Give me your arm .
I'll never care what wickedness I do , If this man come to good .
If she live long , And in the end meet the old course of death , Women will all turn monsters .
Let's follow the old earl , and get the Bedlam To lead him where he would .
His roguish madness Allows itself to any thing .
Go thou .
I'll fetch some flax and whites of eggs To apply to his bleeding face .
Now heaven help him !
The lamentable change is from the best ; The worst returns to laughter .
Welcome , then , Thou unsubstantial air that I embrace !
But who comes here ?
My father , poorly led ?
World , world , O world !
But that thy strange mutations make us hate thee , Life would not yield to age .
I have been your tenant and your father's tenant these fourscore years .
Away , get thee away .
Good friend , be gone .
Alack , sir , you can not see your way .
I have no way , and therefore want no eyes .
I stumbled when I saw .
Full oft 'tis seen , Our means secure us and our mere defects Prove our commodities .
O dear son Edgar , The food of thy abused father's wrath , Might I but live to see thee in my touch , I'd say I had eyes again !
How now ?
Who's there ?
Madman and beggar too .
My son Came then into my mind , and yet my mind Was then scarce friends with him .
I have heard more since .
Is that the naked fellow ?
Ay , my lord .
Alack , sir , he is mad .
Tis the time's plague when madmen lead the blind .
Do as I bid thee .
Or rather , do thy pleasure .
Sirrah , naked fellow , Poor Tom's a-cold .
Come hither , fellow .
Know'st thou the way to Dover ?
Poor Tom hath been scared out of his good wits .
So bless thee , master .
Ay , master .
There is a cliff , whose high and bending head Looks fearfully in the confined deep .
Bring me but to the very brim of it , And I'll repair the misery thou dost bear With something rich about me .
From that place I shall no leading need .
Give me thy arm .
Poor Tom shall lead thee .
Welcome , my lord .
I marvel our mild husband Not met us on the way .
Now , where's your master ?
Sure , her offense Must be of such unnatural degree That monsters it ( or your fore-vouched affection Fall into taint ) , which to believe of her Must be a faith that reason without miracle Could never plant in me .
Go to , go to .
Better thou Hadst not been born than not t ' have pleased me better .
Is it no more but this , a tardiness in nature Which often leaves the history unspoke That it intends to do ? , My lord of Burgundy , What say you to the lady ?
Love's not love When it is mingled with regards that stands Aloof from th ' entire point .
Will you have her ?
She is herself a dowry .
Yours in the ranks of death .
My most dear Gloucester !
Oh , the difference of man and man !
To thee a woman's services are due .
My fool usurps my body .
Madam , here comes my lord .
I have been worth the whistle .
O Goneril , You are not worth the dust which the rude wind Blows in your face .
I fear your disposition .
That nature , which contemns its origin Can not be bordered certain in itself .
She that herself will sliver and disbranch From her material sap perforce must wither And come to deadly use .
No more .
The text is foolish .
Wisdom and goodness to the vile seem vile .
Filths savor but themselves .
What have you done ?
Tigers , not daughters , what have you performed ?
Could my good brother suffer you to do it , A man , a prince by him so benefited ?
Where's thy drum ?
Thou changed and self-covered thing , for shame !
Bemonster not thy feature .
Were 't my fitness To let these hands obey my blood , They are apt enough to dislocate and tear Thy flesh and bones .
Howe'er thou art a fiend , A woman's shape doth shield thee .
Marry , your manhood , mew !
What news ?
Gloucester's eyes ?
But oh , poor Gloucester , Lost he his other eye ?
Both , both , my lord. , This letter , madam , craves a speedy answer .
Tis from your sister .
One way I like this well .
But being widow , and my Gloucester with her , May all the building in my fancy pluck Upon my hateful life .
Come with my lady hither .
He is not here .
No , my good lord .
Ay , my good lord .
Twas he informed against him , And quit the house on purpose that their punishment Might have the freer course .
Tell me what more thou know'st .
Why the King of France is so suddenly gone back know you the reason ?
Something he left imperfect in the state which , since his coming forth , is thought of ; which imports to the kingdom so much fear and danger that his personal return was most required and necessary .
Who hath he left behind him general ?
The Marshal of France , Monsieur la Far .
Did your letters pierce the queen to any demonstration of grief ?
Ay , sir .
It seemed she was a queen Over her passion , who , most rebel-like , Sought to be king o'er her .
O , then it moved her ?
In brief , Sorrow would be a rarity most beloved If all could so become it .
Made she no verbal question ?
Faith , once or twice she heaved the name of "father" Pantingly forth as if it pressed her heart , Cried , "Sisters , sisters !
Shame of ladies , sisters !
Kent , father , sisters !
What , i ' th ' storm , i ' th ' night ?
Let pity not be believed." There she shook The holy water from her heavenly eyes , And clamor moistened .
Then away she started To deal with grief alone .
You spoke not with her since ?
No .
Was this before the king returned ?
No , since .
Why , good sir ?
A sovereign shame so elbows him .
His own unkindness That stripped her from his benediction turned her To foreign casualties , gave her dear rights To his dog-hearted daughters .
These things sting His mind so venomously that burning shame Detains him from Cordelia .
Alack , poor gentleman !
Of Albany's and Cornwall's powers you heard not ?
Tis so .
They are afoot .
Well , sir , I'll bring you to our master Lear And leave you to attend him .
Some dear cause Will in concealment wrap me up awhile .
When I am known aright you shall not grieve Lending me this acquaintance .
I pray you , go Along with me .
Alack , 'tis he .
Why , he was met even now As mad as the vexed sea , singing aloud , Crowned with rank fumiter and furrow-weeds , With burdocks , hemlock , nettles , cuckoo-flowers , Darnel , and all the idle weeds that grow In our sustaining corn. , A century send forth .
Search every acre in the high-grown field , And bring him to our eye .
There is means , madam .
Our foster nurse of nature is repose , The which he lacks , that to provoke in him Are many simples operative , whose power Will close the eye of anguish .
All blessed secrets , All you unpublished virtues of the earth , Spring with my tears .
Be aidant and remediate In the good man's distress .
Seek , seek for him , Lest his ungoverned rage dissolve the life That wants the means to lead it .
News , madam .
The British powers are marching hitherward .
Tis known before .
Our preparation stands In expectation of them .
O dear father , It is thy business that I go about .
Therefore great France My mourning and importuned tears hath pitied .
No blown ambition doth our arms incite , But love , dear love ! , and our aged father's right .
Soon may I hear and see him .
But are my brother's powers set forth ?
Ay , madam .
Himself in person there ?
Madam , with much ado .
Your sister is the better soldier .
Lord Edmund spake not with your lord at home ?
No , madam .
What might import my sister's letter to him ?
I know not , lady .
Faith , he is posted hence on serious matter .
It was great ignorance , Gloucester's eyes being out , To let him live .
Where he arrives he moves All hearts against us .
Edmund I think is gone In pity of his misery to dispatch His nighted life ; moreover to descry The strength o ' th ' enemy .
I must needs after him , madam , with my letter .
Our troops set forth tomorrow .
Stay with us .
The ways are dangerous .
Peace be with Burgundy .
Since that respects and fortunes are his love , I shall not be his wife .
Thee and thy virtues here I seize upon , Be it lawful I take up what's cast away .
Not all the dukes of waterish Burgundy Can buy this unprized precious maid of me. , Bid them farewell , Cordelia , though unkind .
Let her be thine , for we Have no such daughter , nor shall ever see That face of hers again .
Bid farewell to your sisters .
I may not , madam .
My lady charged my duty in this business .
Why should she write to Edmund ?
Belike Some things , I know not what .
Madam , I had rather , I know your lady does not love her husband .
I am sure of that .
And at her late being here She gave strange oeillades and most speaking looks To noble Edmund .
I know you are of her bosom .
I , madam ?
I speak in understanding .
Therefore I do advise you , take this note .
My lord is dead .
Edmund and I have talked , And more convenient is he for my hand Than for your lady's .
You may gather more .
Fare thee well .
When shall we come to th ' top of that same hill ?
Methinks the ground is even .
Horrible steep .
No , truly .
Why then , your other senses grow imperfect By your eyes ' anguish .
So may it be indeed .
Methinks thy voice is altered , and thou speak'st In better phrase and matter than thou didst .
You're much deceived .
In nothing am I changed But in my garments .
Methinks you're better spoken .
Come on , sir .
Here's the place .
Stand still .
How fearful And dizzy 'tis to cast one's eyes so low !
The crows and choughs that wing the midway air Show scarce so gross as beetles .
Halfway down Hangs one that gathers samphire , dreadful trade !
And yon tall anchoring bark ,
The murmuring surge That on th ' unnumbered idle pebbles chafes Can not be heard so high .
Set me where you stand .
Give me your hand .
You are now within a foot Of th ' extreme verge .
Let go my hand .
Now fare you well , good sir .
With all my heart .
O you mighty gods , This world I do renounce , and in your sights Shake patiently my great affliction off .
Gone , sir .
Farewell .
Away , and let me die .
Ten masts at each make not the altitude Which thou hast perpendicularly fell .
Thy life's a miracle .
Speak yet again .
But have I fall'n , or no ?
From the dread summit of this chalky bourn .
Look up a-height .
The shrill-gorged lark so far Can not be seen or heard .
Do but look up .
Twas yet some comfort When misery could beguile the tyrant's rage And frustrate his proud will .
Give me your arm .
Up so .
How is 't ?
Feel you your legs ?
You stand .
Too well , too well .
This is above all strangeness .
Upon the crown o ' th ' cliff , what thing was that Which parted from you ?
A poor unfortunate beggar .
As I stood here below , methought his eyes Were two full moons .
He had a thousand noses , Horns whelked and waved like the enraged sea .
It was some fiend .
I do remember now .
Henceforth I'll bear Affliction till it do cry out itself , "Enough , enough , " and die .
That thing you speak of , I took it for a man .
Bear free and patient thoughts .
But who comes here ?
I am the king himself .
Look , look , a mouse !
peace , this piece of toasted cheese will do 't .
O , well flown , bird .
I ' th ' clout , i ' th ' clout .
Sweet marjoram .
Pass .
I know that voice .
Ha !
Goneril with a white beard ?
Go to , they are not men o ' their words .
They told me I was everything .
The trick of that voice I do well remember .
Is 't not the king ?
Ay , every inch a king .
I pardon that man's life .
What was thy cause ?
Adultery ?
Thou shalt not die .
Die for adultery ?
No .
The wren goes to 't , and the small gilded fly does lecher in my sight .
Let copulation thrive , for Gloucester's bastard son Was kinder to his father than my daughters got 'tween the lawful sheets .
To 't , luxury , pell-mell , for I lack soldiers .
Down from the waist they are centaurs , though women all above .
There's hell , there's darkness , there's the sulfurous pit , burning , scalding , stench , consumption !
Fie , fie , fie , pah , pah ! , Give me an ounce of civet , good apothecary , to sweeten my imagination .
There's money for thee .
O , let me kiss that hand !
Let me wipe it first .
I remember thine eyes well enough .
Dost thou squiny at me ?
Read thou this challenge .
Read .
What , with the case of eyes ?
Oh ho , are you there with me ?
No eyes in your head , nor no money in your purse ?
What , art mad ?
A man may see how this world goes with no eyes .
Look with thine ears .
See how yon justice rails upon yon simple thief .
Thou hast seen a farmer's dog bark at a beggar ?
Ay , sir .
And the creature run from the cur ?
There thou mightst behold the great image of authority : a dog's obeyed in office .
Thou rascal beadle , hold thy bloody hand .
Why dost thou lash that whore ?
Thou hotly lust'st to use her in that kind For which thou whipp'st her .
The usurer hangs the cozener .
None does offend , none , I say , none .
I'll able 'em .
Take that of me , my friend , who have the power To seal th ' accuser's lips .
Harder , harder .
So .
If thou wilt weep my fortunes , take my eyes .
I know thee well enough .
Thy name is Gloucester .
Thou must be patient .
We came crying hither .
Thou know'st the first time that we smell the air We wawl and cry .
I will preach to thee .
Mark me .
Alack , alack the day !
When we are born , we cry that we are come To this great stage of fools .
This a good block .
It were a delicate stratagem to shoe A troop of horse with felt .
I'll put 't in proof .
And when I have stol'n upon these sons-in-law , Then , kill , kill , kill , kill , kill , kill !
What , a prisoner ?
I am even The natural fool of fortune .
Use me well .
You shall have ransom .
Let me have surgeons .
I am cut to th ' brains .
You shall have anything .
No seconds ?
All myself ?
Why , this would make a man a man of salt , To use his eyes for garden water-pots , Ay , and laying autumn's dust .
Good sir ,
I will die bravely , like a smug bridegroom .
What , I will be jovial .
Come , come .
I am a king , my masters , know you that ?
You are a royal one , and we obey you .
Then there's life in 't .
A sight most pitiful in the meanest wretch , Past speaking of in a king .
Hail , gentle sir .
Sir , speed you .
What's your will ?
Do you hear aught , sir , of a battle toward ?
Most sure and vulgar .
Everyone hears that That can distinguish sound .
But , by your favor , how near's the other army ?
Near and on speedy foot .
The main descry Stands in the hourly thought .
I thank you , sir .
That's all .
I know you what you are , And like a sister am most loath to call Your faults as they are named .
But yet , alas , stood I within his grace , I would prefer him to a better place .
So farewell to you both .
Prescribe not us our duty .
Time shall unfold what plighted cunning hides , Who covers faults at last with shame derides .
Well may you prosper .
Come , my fair Cordelia .
Sister , it is not a little I have to say of what most nearly appertains to us both .
I think our father will hence tonight .
That's most certain , and with you .
Next month with us .
You see how full of changes his age is .
He always loved our sister most , and with what poor judgment he hath now cast her off appears too grossly .
Though that the queen on special cause is here , Her army is moved on .
I thank you , sir .
You ever gentle gods , take my breath from me .
Let not my worser spirit tempt me again To die before you please .
Well pray you , father .
Now , good sir , what are you ?
A most poor man made tame to fortune's blows , Who by the art of known and feeling sorrows Am pregnant to good pity .
Hearty thanks .
The bounty and the benison of heaven To boot and boot .
Most happy !
That eyeless head of thine was first framed flesh To raise my fortunes .
Thou old unhappy traitor , Briefly thyself remember .
Now let thy friendly hand Put strength enough to 't .
Wherefore , bold peasant , Darest thou support a published traitor ?
Hence , Lest that th ' infection of his fortune take Like hold on thee .
Let go his arm .
Chill not let go , zir , without vurther 'casion .
Let go , slave , or thou diest !
Chill pick your teeth , zir .
Come , no matter vor your foins .
If ever thou wilt thrive , bury my body .
I know thee well , a serviceable villain , As duteous to the vices of thy mistress As badness would desire .
What , is he dead ?
Let's see these pockets .
The letters that he speaks of May be my friends .
He's dead .
I am only sorry He had no other death's-man .
Let us see .
Leave , gentle wax , and , manners , blame us not .
Their papers is more lawful .
Let our reciprocal vows be remembered .
The king is mad .
Better I were distract , So should my thoughts be severed from my griefs , And woes by wrong imaginations lose The knowledge of themselves .
Give me your hand .
Far off methinks I hear the beaten drum .
Come , father , I'll bestow you with a friend .
O thou good Kent , how shall I live and work To match thy goodness ?
My life will be too short , And every measure fail me .
To be acknowledged , madam , is o'erpaid .
All my reports go with the modest truth , Nor more , nor clipped , but so .
Be better suited .
I prithee , put them off .
My boon I make it that you know me not Till time and I think meet .
Then be 't so , my good lord. , How does the king ?
Madam , sleeps still .
So please your majesty That we may wake the king ?
He hath slept long .
Is he arrayed ?
Ay , madam .
Be by , good madam , when we do awake him .
I doubt not of his temperance .
Very well .
Please you , draw near. , Louder the music there !
Kind and dear princess !
Had you not been their father , these white flakes Did challenge pity of them .
And wast thou fain , poor father , To hovel thee with swine and rogues forlorn In short and musty straw ?
Alack , alack !
Tis wonder that thy life and wits at once Had not concluded all. , He wakes .
Speak to him .
Madam , do you .
Tis fittest .
How does my royal lord ?
How fares your majesty ?
You do me wrong to take me out o ' th ' grave .
Thou art a soul in bliss , but I am bound Upon a wheel of fire , that mine own tears Do scald like molten lead .
Sir , do you know me ?
You are a spirit , I know .
Where did you die ?
Let him alone awhile .
Where have I been ?
Where am I ?
Fair daylight ?
I am mightily abused .
I should ev'n die with pity To see another thus .
I know not what to say .
I will not swear these are my hands .
Let's see .
I feel this pinprick .
Would I were assured Of my condition .
Pray , do not mock me .
I am a very foolish fond old man , Fourscore and upward , not an hour more nor less .
And to deal plainly I fear I am not in my perfect mind .
Methinks I should know you , and know this man .
Nor I know not Where I did lodge last night .
Do not laugh at me , For as I am a man , I think this lady To be my child Cordelia .
And so I am , I am .
Be your tears wet ?
Yes , faith .
I pray , weep not .
If you have poison for me , I will drink it .
You have some cause ; they have not .
No cause , no cause .
Am I in France ?
In your own kingdom , sir .
Do not abuse me .
Be comforted , good madam .
The great rage , You see , is killed in him .
And yet it is danger To make him even o'er the time he has lost .
Desire him to go in .
Trouble him no more Till further settling .
Will 't please your highness walk ?
You must bear with me .
Pray you now , forget and forgive .
I am old and foolish .
Holds it true , sir , that the Duke of Cornwall was so slain ?
Most certain , sir .
Who is conductor of his people ?
As 'tis said , the bastard son of Gloucester .
They say Edgar , his banished son , is with the Earl of Kent in Germany .
Report is changeable .
Tis time to look about .
The powers of the kingdom approach apace .
The arbitrament is like to be bloody .
Fare you well , sir .
Tis to be doubted , madam .
Now , sweet lord , You know the goodness I intend upon you .
Tell me but truly , but then speak the truth , Do you not love my sister ?
In honored love .
I am doubtful that you have been conjunct And bosomed with her as far as we call hers .
No , by mine honor , madam .
Tis the infirmity of his age .
Yet he hath ever but slenderly known himself .
The best and soundest of his time hath been but rash .
Then must we look from his age to receive not alone the imperfections of long-engrafted condition , but therewithal the unruly waywardness that infirm and choleric years bring with them .
Such unconstant starts are we like to have from him as this of Kent's banishment .
There is further compliment of leave-taking between France and him .
Pray you , let's sit together .
If our father carry authority with such dispositions as he bears , this last surrender of his will but offend us .
We shall further think on 't .
We must do something , and i ' th ' heat .
I never shall endure her .
Dear my lord , Be not familiar with her .
Fear me not. , She and the duke her husband !
Sir , you speak nobly .
Why is this reasoned ?
Let's then determine with the ancient of war On our proceedings .
I shall attend you presently at your tent .
Sister , you'll go with us ?
No .
Tis most convenient .
Pray you , go with us .
Stay till I have read the letter .
I was forbid it .
When time shall serve , let but the herald cry , And I'll appear again .
Why , fare thee well .
I will o'erlook thy paper .
Draw up your powers .
We will greet the time .
Which of them shall I take ?
Both ?
One ?
Or neither ?
Neither can be enjoyed If both remain alive .
To take the widow Exasperates , makes mad her sister Goneril , And hardly shall I carry out my side , Her husband being alive .
Now , then , we'll use His countenance for the battle , which being done , Let her who would be rid of him devise His speedy taking off .
If ever I return to you again , I'll bring you comfort .
Grace go with you , sir .
Away , old man .
Give me thy hand .
Away !
King Lear hath lost , he and his daughter ta'en .
Give me thy hand .
Come on .
No further , sir .
Come on .
And that's true too .
Some officers take them away .
Good guard Until their greater pleasures first be known That are to censure them .
No , no , no , no !
Come , let's away to prison .
We two alone will sing like birds i ' th ' cage .
When thou dost ask me blessing , I'll kneel down And ask of thee forgiveness .
And we'll wear out In a walled prison packs and sects of great ones That ebb and flow by the moon .
Take them away .
Upon such sacrifices , my Cordelia , The gods themselves throw incense .
Have I caught thee ?
He that parts us shall bring a brand from heaven And fire us hence like foxes .
Wipe thine eyes .
The good years shall devour them , flesh and fell , Ere they shall make us weep .
We'll see 'em starve first .
Come .
Come hither , captain .
Hark .
I'll do 't , my lord .
About it , and write "happy" when thou'st done .
Mark , I say , instantly , and carry it so As I have set it down .
I can not draw a cart , nor eat dried oats .
If it be man's work , I'll do 't .
I do require them of you , so to use them As we shall find their merits and our safety May equally determine .
With him I sent the queen , My reason all the same , and they are ready Tomorrow or at further space t ' appear Where you shall hold your session .
The question of Cordelia and her father Requires a fitter place .
I hold you but a subject of this war , Not as a brother .
That's as we list to grace him .
Not so hot .
In his own grace he doth exalt himself More than in your addition .
That were the most if he should husband you .
That eye that told you so looked but asquint .
Mean you to enjoy him then ?
Nor in thine , lord .
Half-blooded fellow , yes .
Stay yet .
An interlude !
Thou art armed , Gloucester .
Let the trumpet sound .
Sick , oh , sick !
My sickness grows upon me .
She is not well .
Convey her to my tent .
Come hither , herald. , Let the trumpet sound , , And read out this .
Sound , trumpet !
Again !
Again !
What are you ?
Well then , Legitimate Edgar , I must have your land .
Now , gods , stand up for bastards !
Kent banished thus ?
All this done Upon the gad ? , Edmund , how now ?
What news ?
O , know , my name is lost .
Yet am I noble as the adversary I come to cope withal .
Which is that adversary ?
What's he that speaks for Edmund , Earl of Gloucester ?
Himself .
What sayst thou to him ?
Behold : it is the privilege of mine honors , My oath , and my profession .
In wisdom I should ask thy name .
Back do I toss these treasons to thy head , With the hell-hated lie o'erwhelm thy heart ,
This is practice , Gloucester .
By th ' law of arms thou wast not bound to answer An unknown opposite .
The laws are mine , not thine .
Who can arraign me for 't ?
Most monstrous , oh !
Ask me not what I know .
Go after her .
She's desperate .
What you have charged me with , that have I done , And more , much more .
The time will bring it out .
I am no less in blood than thou art , Edmund .
If more , the more thou'st wronged me .
My name is Edgar , and thy father's son .
The gods are just , and of our pleasant vices Make instruments to plague us .
Thou'st spoken right .
Tis true .
I must embrace thee .
Let sorrow split my heart if ever I Did hate thee or thy father .
Worthy prince , I know 't .
Where have you hid yourself ?
How have you known the miseries of your father ?
List a brief tale , And when 'tis told , oh , that my heart would burst !
The bloody proclamation to escape , That followed me so near , O our lives ' sweetness ,
And in this habit Met I my father with his bleeding rings , Their precious stones new lost , became his guide , Led him , begged for him , saved him from despair .
Never , O fault ! , revealed myself unto him Until some half-hour past , when I was armed .
But his flawed heart , Alack , too weak the conflict to support , 'Twixt two extremes of passion , joy and grief , Burst smilingly .
This speech of yours hath moved me , And shall perchance do good .
But speak you on .
You look as you had something more to say .
If there be more , more woeful , hold it in .
For I am almost ready to dissolve , Hearing of this .
This would have seemed a period To such as love not sorrow , but another To amplify too much would make much more And top extremity .
Twice then the trumpets sounded , And there I left him tranced .
But who was this ?
Kent , sir , the banished Kent , who in disguise Followed his enemy king and did him service Improper for a slave .
Help , help , O , help !
What kind of help ?
Speak , man .
What means that bloody knife ?
Tis hot , it smokes .
It came even from the heart of , oh , she's dead !
Who dead ?
Speak , man .
Your lady , sir , your lady .
And her sister By her is poisoned .
She confesses it .
I was contracted to them both .
All three Now marry in an instant .
Here comes Kent .
I thought the king had more affected the Duke of Albany than Cornwall .
It did always seem so to us .
But now in the division of the kingdom , it appears not which of the dukes he values most , for equalities are so weighed that curiosity in neither can make choice of either's moiety .
His breeding , sir , hath been at my charge .
I have so often blushed to acknowledge him that now I am brazed to it .
Do you smell a fault ?
I can not wish the fault undone , the issue of it being so proper .
But I have , sir , a son by order of law , some year older than this , who yet is no dearer in my account .
Oh , is this he ?
I am come To bid my king and master aye good night .
Is he not here ?
Great thing of us forgot ! , Speak , Edmund , where's the king ?
And where's Cordelia ? , Seest thou this object , Kent ?
Alack , why thus ?
Yet Edmund was beloved .
The one the other poisoned for my sake , And after slew herself .
Even so. , Cover their faces .
I pant for life .
Some good I mean to do Despite of mine own nature .
Quickly send , Be brief in it , to th ' castle , for my writ Is on the life of Lear and on Cordelia .
Nay , send in time !
Run , run , O , run !
To who , my lord ? , Who hath the office ?
Send Thy token of reprieve .
Well thought on .
Take my sword .
The captain , Give it the captain .
Haste thee for thy life .
He hath commission from thy wife and me To hang Cordelia in the prison and To lay the blame upon her own despair , That she fordid herself .
The gods defend her ! , hear him hence awhile .
Howl , howl , howl , howl !
Oh , you are men of stones .
Had I your tongues and eyes , I'd use them so That heaven's vault should crack .
She's gone forever .
I know when one is dead and when one lives .
She's dead as earth .
Lend me a looking-glass .
If that her breath will mist or stain the stone , Why then , she lives .
Or image of that horror ?
Fall and cease .
This feather stirs .
She lives .
If it be so , It is a chance which does redeem all sorrows That ever I have felt .
O my good master !
Prithee , away .
Tis noble Kent , your friend .
A plague upon you , murderers , traitors all !
I might have saved her .
Now she's gone for ever. , Cordelia , Cordelia , stay a little .
Ha ?
Tis true , my lords , he did .
Did I not , fellow ?
I am old now , And these same crosses spoil me .
This a dull sight .
Are you not Kent ?
The same .
Your servant Kent .
Where is your servant Caius ?
He's a good fellow , I can tell you that .
He's dead and rotten .
No , my good lord .
I am the very man , I'll see that straight .
That from your first of difference and decay Have followed your sad steps .
You're welcome hither .
Nor no man else .
All's cheerless , dark , and deadly .
Your eldest daughters have fordone themselves , And desperately are dead .
Ay , so I think .
He knows not what he says , and vain it is That we present us to him .
Edmund is dead , my lord .
For us , we will resign During the life of this old majesty To him our absolute power .
He faints ! , My lord , my lord !
Vex not his ghost .
O , let him pass .
Oh , he is gone indeed .
The wonder is he hath endured so long .
Bear them from hence .
Our present business Is to general woe .
Why so earnestly seek you to put up that letter ?
I know no news , my lord .
What paper were you reading ?
Nothing , my lord .
No ?
What needed , then , that terrible dispatch of it into your pocket ?
The quality of nothing hath not such need to hide itself .
I beseech you , sir , pardon me .
It is a letter from my brother that I have not all o'er-read .
Give me the letter , sir .
I shall offend , either to detain or give it .
The contents , as in part I understand them , are to blame .
I hope , for my brother's justification , he wrote this but as an essay or taste of my virtue .
I have a journey , sir , shortly to go .
My master calls me .
I must not say no .
The weight of this sad time we must obey .
Speak what we feel , not what we ought to say .
Come to me , that of this I may speak more .
If our father would sleep till I waked him , you should enjoy half his revenue forever , and live the beloved of your brother , Edgar." Hum , conspiracy ?
Had he a hand to write this , a heart and brain to breed it in ?
When came this to you ?
Who brought it ?
It was not brought me , my lord .
There's the cunning of it .
I found it thrown in at the casement of my closet .
You know the character to be your brother's ?
If the matter were good , my lord , I durst swear it were his .
But in respect of that , I would fain think it were not .
It is his .
It is his hand , my lord , but I hope his heart is not in the contents .
Has he never before sounded you in this business ?
Never , my lord .
But I have heard him oft maintain it to be fit that , sons at perfect age and fathers declined , the father should be as ward to the son , and the son manage his revenue .
O villain , villain !
His very opinion in the letter !
Abhorred villain !
Go , sirrah , seek him .
I'll apprehend him .
Abominable villain !
Where is he ?
I do not well know , my lord .
I dare pawn down my life for him that he hath wrote this to feel my affection to your honor and to no other pretense of danger .
Think you so ?
He can not be such a monster , Nor is not , sure .
To his father , that so tenderly and entirely loves him .
Heaven and earth !
Edmund , seek him out , wind me into him , I pray you .
I will seek him , sir , presently , convey the business as I shall find means , and acquaint you withal .
These late eclipses in the sun and moon portend no good to us .
Though the wisdom of nature can reason it thus and thus , yet nature finds itself scourged by the sequent effects .
Love cools , friendship falls off , brothers divide , in cities
mutinies , in countries discord , in palaces treason , and the bond cracked 'twixt son and father .
This villain of mine comes under the prediction , there's son against father .
The king falls from bias of nature , there's father against child .
We have seen the best of our time .
Machinations , hollowness , treachery , and all ruinous disorders follow us disquietly to our graves .
Find out this villain , Edmund .
It shall lose thee nothing .
Do it carefully. , And the noble and true-hearted Kent banished , his offense honesty !
Tis strange , strange .
This is the excellent foppery of the world that when we are sick in fortune , often the surfeit of our own behavior , we make guilty of our disasters the sun , the moon , and the stars , as if we were villains by necessity , fools by heavenly compulsion , knaves , thieves , and treachers by spherical predominance , drunkards , liars , and adulterers by an enforced obedience of planetary influence , and all that we are evil in by a divine thrusting-on .
My father compounded with my mother under the dragon's tail and my nativity was under Ursa Major , so that it follows I am rough and lecherous .
Fut , I should have been that I am , had the maidenliest star in the firmament twinkled on my bastardizing .
Fa , sol , la , mi .
How now , brother Edmund ?
What serious contemplation are you in ?
How long have you been a sectary astronomical ?
Come , come .
When saw you my father last ?
Why , the night gone by .
Spake you with him ?
Ay , two hours together .
Parted you in good terms ?
Found you no displeasure in him by word or countenance ?
None at all .
Some villain hath done me wrong .
That's my fear .
I pray you , have a continent forbearance till the speed of his rage goes slower .
And as I say , retire with me to my lodging , from whence I will fitly bring you to hear my lord speak .
Pray ye , go .
There's my key .
If you do stir abroad , go armed .
Armed , brother ?
Brother , I advise you to the best .
Go armed .
Pray you , away .
Shall I hear from you anon ?
I do serve you in this business .
A credulous father , and a brother noble , Whose nature is so far from doing harms That he suspects none , on whose foolish honesty My practices ride easy .
I see the business .
Let me , if not by birth , have lands by wit .
All with me's meet that I can fashion fit .
Did my father strike my gentleman For chiding of his fool ?
Ay , madam .
By day and night he wrongs me .
Every hour He flashes into one gross crime or other That sets us all at odds .
I'll not endure it .
His knights grow riotous , and himself upbraids us On every trifle .
When he returns from hunting , I will not speak with him .
Say I am sick .
If you come slack of former services , You shall do well .
The fault of it I'll answer .
He's coming , madam .
I hear him .
Put on what weary negligence you please , You and your fellow servants .
If he distaste it , let him to our sister , Whose mind and mine I know in that are one , Not to be overruled .
Idle old man That still would manage those authorities That he hath given away !
Now by my life , Old fools are babes again and must be used With checks as flatteries , when they are seen abused .
Remember what I have said .
Very well , madam .
And let his knights have colder looks among you .
What grows of it , no matter .
Advise your fellows so .
I would breed from hence occasions , and I shall , That I may speak .
I'll write straight to my sister To hold my very course .
Go , prepare for dinner .
If but as well I other accents borrow , That can my speech diffuse , my good intent May carry through itself to that full issue For which I razed my likeness .
Now , banished Kent , If thou canst serve where thou dost stand condemned , So may it come thy master , whom thou lovest , Shall find thee full of labors .
Let me not stay a jot for dinner .
Go get it ready .
A man , sir .
What dost thou profess ?
What wouldst thou with us ?
What art thou ?
A very honest-hearted fellow , and as poor as the king .
If thou beest as poor for a subject as he's for a king , thou'rt poor enough .
What wouldst thou ?
Service .
Who wouldst thou serve ?
You .
Dost thou know me , fellow ?
Authority .
What services canst thou do ?
I can keep honest counsel , ride , run , mar a curious tale in telling it , and deliver a plain message bluntly .
That which ordinary men are fit for , I am qualified in .
And the best of me is diligence .
How old art thou ?
Not so young , sir , to love a woman for singing , nor so old to dote on her for anything .
I have years on my back forty- eight .
Follow me .
Thou shalt serve me .
Where's my knave , my fool ? , Go you , and call my fool hither .
No , my lord .
My services to your lordship .
I must love you and sue to know you better .
Sir , I shall study deserving .
He hath been out nine years , and away he shall again .
The king is coming .
Attend the lords of France and Burgundy , Gloucester .
I shall , my lord .
You , you , sirrah , where's my daughter ?
So please you , What says the fellow there ?
Call the clotpoll back .
Where's my fool , ho ?
I think the world's asleep .
How now ?
Where's that mongrel ?
He says , my lord , your daughter is not well .
Why came not the slave back to me when I called him .
Sir , he answered me in the roundest manner he would not .
He would not ?
My lord , I know not what the matter is , but to my judgment your highness is not entertained with that ceremonious affection as you were wont .
There's a great abatement of kindness appears as well in the general dependants as in the duke himself also , and your daughter .
Ha !
Sayest thou so ?
I beseech you pardon me , my lord , if I be mistaken , for my duty can not be silent when I think your highness wronged .
Thou but rememberest me of mine own conception .
I have perceived a most faint neglect of late , which I have rather blamed as mine own jealous curiosity than as a very pretense and purpose of unkindness .
I will look further into 't .
But where's my fool ?
I have not seen him this two days .
Since my young lady's going into France , sir , the fool hath much pined away .
No more of that .
I have noted it well .
Go you and tell my daughter I would speak with her .
Go you , call hither my fool .
O you sir , you , come you hither , sir .
Who am I , sir ?
You slave , you cur !
I am none of these , my lord .
I beseech your pardon .
I'll not be strucken , my lord .
Now , my friendly knave , I thank thee .
Let me hire him too. , Here's my coxcomb .
How now , my pretty knave ?
How dost thou ?
Why , Fool ?
Why ?
For taking one's part that's out of favor .
Nay , an thou canst not smile as the wind sits , thou'lt catch cold shortly .
There , take my coxcomb .
Why , this fellow has banished two on 's daughters , and did the third a blessing against his will .
If thou follow him , thou must needs wear my coxcomb. , How now , nuncle ?
Would I had two coxcombs and two daughters .
Why , my boy ?
If I gave them all my living , I'd keep my coxcombs myself .
There's mine .
Beg another of thy daughters .
Take heed , sirrah , the whip .
A pestilent gall to me !
Sirrah , I'll teach thee a speech .
Do .
Mark it , nuncle .
Have more than thou showest , Speak less than thou knowest , Lend less than thou owest , Ride more than thou goest , Learn more than thou trowest , Set less than thou throwest , Leave thy drink and thy whore And keep in-a-door , And thou shalt have more Than two tens to a score .
This is nothing , Fool .
Then 'tis like the breath of an unfee'd lawyer .
Why no , boy .
Nothing can be made out of nothing .
A bitter fool .
Dost thou know the difference , my boy , between a bitter fool and a sweet fool ?
No , lad .
Teach me .
That lord that counseled thee To give away thy land , Come place him here by me .
Do thou for him stand .
The sweet and bitter fool Will presently appear , The one in motley here , The other found out there .
Dost thou call me fool , boy ?
All thy other titles thou hast given away that thou wast born with .
This is not altogether fool , my lord .
No , faith , lords and great men will not let me .
What two crowns shall they be ?
Why , after I have cut the egg i ' th ' middle and eat up the meat , the two crowns of the egg .
If I speak like myself in this , let him be whipped that first finds it so .
When were you wont to be so full of songs , sirrah ?
I have used it , nuncle , ever since thou madest thy daughters thy mothers .
For when thou gavest them the rod , and put'st down thine own breeches , Prithee , nuncle , keep a schoolmaster that can teach thy fool to lie .
I would fain learn to lie .
An you lie , sirrah , we'll have you whipped .
I marvel what kin thou and thy daughters are .
They'll have me whipped for speaking true , thou'lt have me whipped for lying , and sometimes I am whipped for holding my peace .
I had rather be any kind o ' thing than a fool .
And yet I would not be thee , nuncle .
Here comes one o ' the parings .
How now , daughter ?
What makes that frontlet on ?
Methinks you are too much of late i ' th ' frown .
He that keeps nor crust nor crumb , Weary of all , shall want some .
But other of your insolent retinue Do hourly carp and quarrel , breaking forth In rank and not-to-be-endured riots .
Which else were shame , that then necessity Will call discreet proceeding .
For you know , nuncle , The hedge-sparrow fed the cuckoo so long , That it's had it head bit off by it young .
So out went the candle and we were left darkling .
Are you our daughter ?
Does any here know me ?
Why , this is not Lear .
Where are his eyes ?
Sure , 'tis not so .
Who is it that can tell me who I am ?
Lear's shadow .
Which they will make an obedient father .
This admiration , sir , is much o ' th ' savor Of other your new pranks .
I do beseech you To understand my purposes aright .
As you are old and reverend , should be wise .
Here do you keep a hundred knights and squires , Men so disordered , so debauched and bold That this our court , infected with their manners , Shows like a riotous inn .
Epicurism and lust Make it more like a tavern or a brothel Than a graced palace .
The shame itself doth speak For instant remedy .
Darkness and devils !
Saddle my horses .
Call my train together. , Degenerate bastard , I'll not trouble thee .
Yet have I left a daughter .
You strike my people , and your disordered rabble Make servants of their betters .
Woe that too late repents ! , Is it your will ?
Ingratitude , thou marble-hearted fiend , More hideous when thou show'st thee in a child Than the sea monster .
Pray , sir , be patient .
It may be so , my lord .
Hear , Nature , hear , dear goddess , hear !
Dry up in her the organs of increase , And from her derogate body never spring A babe to honor her .
To thine and Albany's issue Be this perpetual. , What says our second daughter , Our dearest Regan , wife of Cornwall ?
Speak .
Now gods that we adore , whereof comes this ?
Thou shalt find That I'll resume the shape which thou dost think I have cast off for ever .
Thou shalt , I warrant thee .
Do you mark that , my lord ?
I can not be so partial , Goneril , To the great love I bear you , Pray you , content .
Come , sire , no more. , What , Oswald , ho !
A fox when one has caught her And such a daughter Should sure to the slaughter , If my cap would buy a halter .
So the fool follows after .
This man hath had good counsel , a hundred knights !
Well , you may fear too far .
Safer than trust too far .
Let me still take away the harms I fear , Not fear still to be taken .
I know his heart .
What he hath uttered I have writ my sister .
If she sustain him and his hundred knights When I have showed th ' unfitness , Here , madam .
How now , Oswald ?
What , have you writ that letter to my sister ?
Ay , madam .
Take you some company , and away to horse .
Inform her full of my particular fear , And thereto add such reasons of your own As may compact it more .
Get you gone And hasten your return .
Striving to better , oft we mar what's well .
Nay , then , Well , well , th ' event .
I will not sleep , my lord , till I have delivered your letter .
If a man's brains were in 's heels , were 't not in danger of kibes ?
Ay , boy .
Ha , ha , ha !
Shalt see thy other daughter will use thee kindly .
For though she's as like this as a crab's like an apple , yet I can tell what I can tell .
Why , what canst thou tell , my boy ?
She will taste as like this as a crab does to a crab .
Thou canst tell why one's nose stands i ' th ' middle on 's face ?
No .
Why , to keep one's eyes of either side 's nose , that what a man can not smell out , he may spy into .
I did her wrong , Canst tell how an oyster makes his shell ?
No .
Nor I neither .
But I can tell why a snail has a house .
Why ?
Why , to put 's head in , not to give it away to his daughters and leave his horns without a case .
I will forget my nature .
So kind a father ! , Be my horses ready ?
Thy asses are gone about 'em .
The reason why the seven stars are no more than seven is a pretty reason .
Because they are not eight ?
Yes indeed .
Thou wouldst make a good fool .
To take 't again perforce , Monster ingratitude !
If thou wert my fool , nuncle , I'd have thee beaten for being old before thy time .
How's that ?
Thou shouldst not have been old till thou hadst been wise .
O , let me not be mad , not mad , sweet heaven !
Keep me in temper .
I would not be mad .
Ready , my lord .
Come , boy .
Save thee , Curan .
And you , sir .
I have been with your father and given him notice that the Duke of Cornwall and Regan his duchess will be here with him this night .
How comes that ?
Nay , I know not .
Have you heard of no likely wars toward 'twixt the two Dukes of Cornwall and Albany ?
Not a word .
You may do then in time .
Fare you well , sir .
The duke be here tonight ?
This weaves itself perforce into my business .
Briefness and fortune , work ! , Brother , a word .
Descend , brother , I say .
My father watches .
O sir , fly this place .
Intelligence is given where you are hid .
Have you not spoken 'gainst the Duke of Cornwall aught ?
He's coming hither , now , i ' th ' night , i ' th ' haste , And Regan with him .
Advise yourself .
I hear my father coming .
Pardon me .
In cunning I must draw my sword upon you .
Now quit you well. , Torches , torches !
Now Edmund , where's the villain ?
Look , sir , I bleed .
Where is the villain , Edmund ?
Fled this way , sir , when by no means he could , Pursue him , ho !
Go after .
By no means" what ?
Sir , in fine , Seeing how loathly opposite I stood To his unnatural purpose , in fell motion , With his prepared sword he charges home My unprovided body , latched mine arm .
And when he saw my best alarumed spirits , Bold in the quarrel's right , roused to the encounter , Or whether ghasted by the noise I made , Full suddenly he fled .
Let him fly far .
Not in this land shall he remain uncaught .
The noble duke my master , My worthy arch and patron , comes tonight .
And find I am alone felicitate In your dear highness ' love .
Speak .
Nothing , my lord .
Nothing ?
Nothing .
Nothing will come of nothing .
Speak again .
Unhappy that I am , I can not heave My heart into my mouth .
I love your majesty According to my bond , no more nor less .
How , how , Cordelia ?
Mend your speech a little , Lest you may mar your fortunes .
He that conceals him , death .
He replied , "Thou unpossessing bastard !
Dost thou think If I would stand against thee , would the reposal Of any trust , virtue , or worth in thee Make thy words faithed ?
No .
What I should deny , As this I would , ay , though thou didst produce My very character , I'd turn it all To thy suggestion , plot , and damned practice .
And thou must make a dullard of the world , If they not thought the profits of my death Were very pregnant and potential spirits To make thee seek it." O strange and fastened villain !
Would he deny his letter , said he ?
I never got him. , Hark , the duke's trumpets .
I know not why he comes .
All ports I'll bar .
The villain shall not 'scape .
The duke must grant me that .
How now , my noble friend ?
Since I came hither , Which I can call but now , I have heard strange news .
How dost , my lord ?
O madam , my old heart is cracked , it's cracked .
O , lady , lady , shame would have it hid .
Was he not companion with the riotous knights That tend upon my father ?
I know not , madam .
Tis too bad , too bad .
Yes , madam , he was of that consort .
No marvel then , though he were ill affected .
Tis they have put him on the old man's death , To have th ' expense and spoil of his revenues .
I have this present evening from my sister Been well informed of them , and with such cautions That if they come to sojourn at my house I'll not be there .
Nor I , assure thee , Regan. , Edmund , I hear that you have shown your father A childlike office .
It was my duty , sir .
He did bewray his practice , and received This hurt you see striving to apprehend him .
Is he pursued ?
Ay , my good lord .
If he be taken , he shall never more Be feared of doing harm .
Natures of such deep trust we shall much need .
I shall serve you , sir , Truly , however else .
You know not why we came to visit you , Thus out of season , threading dark-eyed night .
The several messengers From hence attend dispatch .
Our good old friend , Lay comforts to your bosom , and bestow Your needful counsel to our business , Which craves the instant use .
I serve you , madam .
Your graces are right welcome .
Good dawning to thee , friend .
Art of this house ?
Ay .
Where may we set our horses ?
I ' th ' mire .
Prithee , if thou lovest me , tell me .
I love thee not .
Why , then , I care not for thee .
If I had thee in Lipsbury pinfold , I would make thee care for me .
Why dost thou use me thus ?
I know thee not .
Fellow , I know thee .
What dost thou know me for ?
Why , what a monstrous fellow art thou , thus to rail on one that is neither known of thee nor knows thee !
What a brazen-faced varlet art thou to deny thou knowest me !
Is it two days ago since I tripped up thy heels and beat thee before the king ?
Draw , you rogue , for though it be night yet the moon shines .
I'll make a sop o ' th ' moonshine of you .
Away !
I have nothing to do with thee .
Draw , you rascal .
You come with letters against the king and take Vanity the puppet's part against the royalty of her father .
Draw , you rogue , or I'll so carbonado your shanks .
Draw , you rascal !
Come your ways .
Help , ho !
Murder !
Help !
Stand , you neat slave , strike !
Help , ho !
Murder , murder !
Macbeth .
Then stand with us .
The west yet glimmers with some streaks of day .
Now spurs the lated traveler apace To gain the timely inn , and near approaches The subject of our watch .
Then 'tis he : the rest That are within the note of expectation Already are i ' th ' court .
Tis he .
Stand to 't .
It will be rain tonight .
Let it come down .
O treachery !
Fly , good Fleance , fly , fly , fly !
Thou may 'st revenge , O slave !
Who did strike out the light ?
Was 't not the way ?
There's but one down .
The son is fled .
We have lost best half of our affair .
Well , let's away and say how much is done .
At first And last , the hearty welcome .
Thanks to your majesty .
Ourself will mingle with society And play the humble host .
Pronounce it for me , sir , to all our friends , For my heart speaks they are welcome .
See , they encounter thee with their hearts ' thanks .
Both sides are even .
Here I'll sit i ' th ' midst .
Be large in mirth .
Anon we'll drink a measure The table round .
Tis Banquo's then .
My lord , his throat is cut .
That I did for him .
Thou art the best o ' th ' cutthroats : Yet he's good that did the like for Fleance .
If thou didst it , thou art the nonpareil .
Most royal sir , Fleance is 'scaped .
Then comes my fit again .
I had else been perfect , Whole as the marble , founded as the rock , As broad and general as the casing air .
Ay , my good lord .
Safe in a ditch he bides , With twenty trenched gashes on his head , The least a death to nature .
Thanks for that .
There the grown serpent lies .
The worm that's fled Hath nature that in time will venom breed ; No teeth for th ' present .
Get thee gone .
Tomorrow We'll hear ourselves again .
My royal lord , You do not give the cheer .
To feed were best at home ; From thence , the sauce to meat is ceremony ; Meeting were bare without it .
Where hast thou been , sister ?
Killing swine .
Sister , where thou ?
A sailor's wife had chestnuts in her lap , And munched , and munched , and munched .
Give me , " quoth I .
Aroint thee , witch ! " the rump-fed runnion cries .
Thou 'rt kind .
And I another .
I'll drain him dry as hay .
Sleep shall neither night nor day Hang upon his penthouse lid .
He shall live a man forbid .
Weary sev'nnights nine times nine Shall he dwindle , peak and pine .
Sweet remembrancer !
May 't please your highness sit .
His absence , sir , Lays blame upon his promise .
Please 't your highness To grace us with your royal company ?
The table's full .
Here is a place reserved , sir .
Where ?
What , my good lord ?
Gentlemen , rise .
His highness is not well .
Sit , worthy friends .
My lord is often thus And hath been from his youth .
Pray you , keep seat .
If much you note him , You shall offend him and extend his passion .
Feed and regard him not .
Ay , and a bold one , that dare look on that Which might appall the devil .
O proper stuff !
This is the very painting of your fear .
This is the air-drawn dagger which you said Led you to Duncan .
Oh , these flaws and starts , Impostors to true fear , would well become A woman's story at a winter's fire , Authorized by her grandam .
Shame itself !
Why do you make such faces ?
When all's done , You look but on a stool .
Prithee , see there !
Behold !
Look !
If I stand here , I saw him .
Fie , for shame !
The time has been That , when the brains were out , the man would die , And there an end .
But now they rise again With twenty mortal murders on their crowns And push us from our stools .
This is more strange Than such a murder is .
My worthy lord , Your noble friends do lack you .
Our duties , and the pledge .
Approach thou like the rugged Russian bear , The armed rhinoceros , or th ' Hyrcan tiger ; Take any shape but that , and my firm nerves Shall never tremble .
Or be alive again , And dare me to the desert with thy sword .
If trembling I inhabit then , protest me The baby of a girl .
Hence , horrible shadow !
Unreal mockery , hence !
Why so , being gone , Why so , being gone , I am a man again .
Pray you sit still .
You have displaced the mirth , broke the good meeting , With most admired disorder .
What sights , my lord ?
I pray you , speak not .
He grows worse and worse .
Question enrages him .
At once , good night .
A kind good night to all !
Stones have been known to move , and trees to speak .
Almost at odds with morning , which is which .
Did you send to him , sir ?
I hear it by the way ; but I will send .
There's not a one of them but in his house I keep a servant fee'd .
I will tomorrow , And betimes I will , to the weird sisters .
More shall they speak , for now I am bent to know , By the worst means , the worst .
For mine own good , All causes shall give way .
Strange things I have in head , that will to hand , Which must be acted ere they may be scanned .
Come , we'll to sleep .
My strange and self-abuse Is the initiate fear that wants hard use .
We are yet but young in deed .
Why , how now , Hecate !
You look angerly .
Have I not reason , beldams as you are ?
But make amends now .
Get you gone , And at the pit of Acheron Meet me i ' th ' morning .
Thither he Will come to know his destiny .
Your vessels and your spells provide , Your charms and everything beside .
I am for the air .
This night I'll spend Unto a dismal and a fatal end .
Great business must be wrought ere noon .
Upon the corner of the moon There hangs a vap'rous drop profound .
I'll catch it ere it come to ground .
And that distilled by magic sleights Shall raise such artificial sprites As by the strength of their illusion Shall draw him on to his confusion .
He shall spurn fate , scorn death , and bear His hopes 'bove wisdom , grace , and fear .
And you all know , security Is mortals ' chiefest enemy .
Hark !
I am called .
My little spirit , see , Sits in a foggy cloud and stays for me .
Only I say Things have been strangely borne .
Men must not walk too late .
Who can not want the thought how monstrous It was for Malcolm and for Donalbain To kill their gracious father ?
All which we pine for now .
And this report Hath so exasperated the king that he Prepares for some attempt of war .
Sent he to Macduff ?
I'll send my prayers with him .
Though his bark can not be lost , Yet it shall be tempest-tossed .
Look what I have .
Show me , show me .
A drum , a drum !
Macbeth doth come .
Thrice the brinded cat hath mewed .
Harpier cries , "'Tis time , 'tis time." Round about the cauldron go , In the poisoned entrails throw .
Double , double toil and trouble , Fire burn , and cauldron bubble .
Double , double toil and trouble , Fire burn and cauldron bubble .
Double , double toil and trouble , Fire burn and cauldron bubble .
Cool it with a baboon's blood , Then the charm is firm and good .
Oh well done !
I commend your pains , And every one shall share i ' th ' gains .
And now about the cauldron sing , Like elves and fairies in a ring , Enchanting all that you put in .
By the pricking of my thumbs , Something wicked this way comes .
Open , locks , Whoever knocks .
How now , you secret , black , and midnight hags ?
What is 't you do ?
A deed without a name .
I conjure you by that which you profess , Howe'er you come to know it , answer me .
Speak .
Demand .
We'll answer .
Say , if th ' hadst rather hear it from our mouths , Or from our masters ' .
Call 'em .
Let me see 'em .
Pour in sow's blood , that hath eaten Her nine farrow ; grease that's sweaten From the murderer's gibbet throw Into the flame .
Tell me , thou unknown power , He knows thy thought .
Hear his speech but say thou nought .
Macbeth !
Macbeth !
Macbeth !
Beware Macduff .
Beware the thane of Fife .
Dismiss me .
Enough .
Whate'er thou art , for thy good caution , thanks .
Thou hast harped my fear aright .
But one word more , He will not be commanded .
Here's another More potent than the first .
Macbeth !
Macbeth ! , Had I three ears , I'd hear thee .
Be bloody , bold , and resolute .
Laugh to scorn The power of man , for none of woman born Shall harm Macbeth .
But yet I'll make assurance double sure , And take a bond of fate .
Thou shalt not live , That I may tell pale-hearted fear it lies , And sleep in spite of thunder .
What is this That rises like the issue of a king , And wears upon his baby-brow the round And top of sovereignty ?
Listen but speak not to 't .
Be lion-mettled , proud , and take no care Who chafes , who frets , or where conspirers are .
Macbeth shall never vanquished be until Great Birnam Wood to high Dunsinane Hill Shall come against him .
That will never be .
Who can impress the forest , bid the tree Unfix his earthbound root ?
Sweet bodements !
Good !
Rebellious dead , rise never till the wood Of Birnam rise , and our high-placed Macbeth Shall live the lease of nature , pay his breath To time and mortal custom .
Yet my heart Throbs to know one thing .
Tell me , if your art Can tell so much : shall Banquo's issue ever Reign in this kingdom ?
Seek to know no more .
I will be satisfied .
Deny me this , And an eternal curse fall on you !
Let me know .
Why sinks that cauldron ?
And what noise is this ?
Show .
Show .
Show .
Show his eyes and grieve his heart .
Come like shadows ; so depart !
Thou art too like the spirit of Banquo .
I'll see no more .
Horrible sight !
What , is this so ?
Come , sisters , cheer we up his sprites , And show the best of our delights .
Where are they ?
Gone ?
Let this pernicious hour Stand aye accursed in the calendar !
What's your grace's will ?
Saw you the weird sisters ?
No , my lord .
Came they not by you ?
No , indeed , my lord .
I did hear The galloping of horse .
Who was 't came by ?
Tis two or three , my lord , that bring you word Macduff is fled to England .
Fled to England ?
Ay , my good lord .
Time , thou anticipat'st my dread exploits .
No boasting like a fool .
This deed I'll do before this purpose cool .
But no more sights ! , Where are these gentlemen ?
Come , bring me where they are .
What had he done to make him fly the land ?
You must have patience , madam .
He had none .
His flight was madness .
When our actions do not , Our fears do make us traitors .
You know not Whether it was his wisdom or his fear .
Wisdom !
To leave his wife , to leave his babes , His mansion and his titles in a place From whence himself does fly ?
For the poor wren , The most diminutive of birds , will fight , Her young ones in her nest , against the owl .
All is the fear and nothing is the love , As little is the wisdom , where the flight So runs against all reason .
My dearest coz , I pray you school yourself .
But for your husband , He is noble , wise , judicious , and best knows The fits o ' th ' season .
I take my leave of you .
Shall not be long but I'll be here again .
Things at the worst will cease , or else climb upward To what they were before. , My pretty cousin , Blessing upon you .
Fathered he is , and yet he's fatherless .
I am so much a fool , should I stay longer It would be my disgrace and your discomfort .
I take my leave at once .
Sirrah , your father's dead .
And what will you do now ?
How will you live ?
As birds do , Mother .
What , with worms and flies ?
With what I get , I mean , and so do they .
Poor bird !
Thou 'dst never fear the net nor lime , The pitfall nor the gin .
My father is not dead , for all your saying .
Yes , he is dead .
How wilt thou do for a father ?
Nay , how will you do for a husband ?
Why , I can buy me twenty at any market .
Speak , if you can : what are you ?
All hail , Macbeth !
Hail to thee , thane of Glamis !
All hail , Macbeth !
Hail !
Hail !
Hail !
Lesser than Macbeth and greater .
Not so happy , yet much happier .
Thou shalt get kings , though thou be none .
So all hail , Macbeth and Banquo !
Then you'll buy 'em to sell again .
Thou speak'st with all thy wit ; and yet , i ' faith , With wit enough for thee .
Was my father a traitor , Mother ?
Ay , that he was .
What is a traitor ?
Why , one that swears and lies .
And be all traitors that do so ?
Every one that does so is a traitor and must be hanged .
And must they all be hanged that swear and lie ?
Every one .
Who must hang them ?
Why , the honest men .
Then the liars and swearers are fools , for there are liars and swearers enough to beat the honest men and hang up them .
If he were dead , you'd weep for him .
If you would not , it were a good sign that I should quickly have a new father .
Poor prattler , how thou talk'st !
Bless you , fair dame !
I am not to you known , Though in your state of honor I am perfect .
I doubt some danger does approach you nearly .
If you will take a homely man's advice , Be not found here .
Hence with your little ones .
To fright you thus methinks I am too savage ; To do worse to you were fell cruelty , Which is too nigh your person .
Heaven preserve you !
I dare abide no longer .
Whither should I fly ?
I have done no harm .
But I remember now I am in this earthly world , where to do harm Is often laudable , to do good sometime Accounted dangerous folly .
Why then , alas , Do I put up that womanly defense , To say I have done no harm ?
What are these faces ?
Where is your husband ?
I hope , in no place so unsanctified Where such as thou mayst find him .
He's a traitor .
Thou liest , thou shag-haired villain !
Young fry of treachery !
He has killed me , mother .
Run away , I pray you !
Let us seek out some desolate shade and there Weep our sad bosoms empty .
Let us rather Hold fast the mortal sword and , like good men , Bestride our downfall'n birthdom .
Each new morn New widows howl , new orphans cry , new sorrows Strike heaven on the face , that it resounds As if it felt with Scotland and yelled out Like syllable of dolor .
What you have spoke , it may be so perchance .
This tyrant , whose sole name blisters our tongues , Was once thought honest .
You have loved him well .
He hath not touched you yet .
I am young , but something You may deserve of him through me , and wisdom To offer up a weak , poor , innocent lamb T ' appease an angry god .
I am not treacherous .
But Macbeth is .
A good and virtuous nature may recoil In an imperial charge .
But I shall crave your pardon .
That which you are , my thoughts can not transpose .
Angels are bright still , though the brightest fell .
Though all things foul would wear the brows of grace , Yet grace must still look so .
Why in that rawness left you wife and child , Those precious motives , those strong knots of love , Without leave-taking ?
I pray you , Let not my jealousies be your dishonors , But mine own safeties .
You may be rightly just , Whatever I shall think .
Bleed , bleed , poor country !
I would not be the villain that thou think'st For the whole space that's in the tyrant's grasp , And the rich East to boot .
Be not offended .
I speak not as in absolute fear of you .
I think our country sinks beneath the yoke .
It weeps , it bleeds , and each new day a gash Is added to her wounds .
I think withal There would be hands uplifted in my right ; And here from gracious England have I offer Of goodly thousands .
What should he be ?
Not in the legions Of horrid hell can come a devil more damned In evils to top Macbeth .
I grant him bloody , Luxurious , avaricious , false , deceitful , Sudden , malicious , smacking of every sin That has a name .
But there's no bottom , none , In my voluptuousness .
Your wives , your daughters , Your matrons , and your maids could not fill up The cistern of my lust , and my desire All continent impediments would o'erbear That did oppose my will .
Better Macbeth Than such an one to reign .
Boundless intemperance In nature is a tyranny .
It hath been The untimely emptying of the happy throne And fall of many kings .
But fear not yet To take upon you what is yours .
We have willing dames enough .
This avarice Sticks deeper , grows with more pernicious root Than summer-seeming lust , and it hath been The sword of our slain kings .
But I have none .
Nay , had I power , I should Pour the sweet milk of concord into hell , Uproar the universal peace , confound All unity on earth .
O Scotland , Scotland !
If such a one be fit to govern , speak .
Fare thee well !
Whither indeed , before thy here-approach , Old Siward , with ten thousand warlike men , Already at a point , was setting forth .
Why are you silent ?
Such welcome and unwelcome things at once 'T is hard to reconcile .
Well , more anon. , Comes the king forth , I pray you ?
Ay , sir ; there are a crew of wretched souls That stay his cure .
Their malady convinces The great assay of art , but at his touch , Such sanctity hath heaven given his hand , They presently amend .
I thank you , doctor .
What's the disease he means ?
Tis called the evil .
A most miraculous work in this good king , Which often since my here-remain in England I have seen him do .
With this strange virtue , He hath a heavenly gift of prophecy , And sundry blessings hang about his throne , That speak him full of grace .
See , who comes here ?
My countryman , but yet I know him not .
My ever-gentle cousin , welcome hither .
Sir , amen .
Stands Scotland where it did ?
Alas , poor country !
Almost afraid to know itself .
Oh , relation Too nice and yet too true !
Banquo and Macbeth , all hail !
Stay , you imperfect speakers , tell me more .
Say from whence You owe this strange intelligence , or why Upon this blasted heath you stop our way With such prophetic greeting .
Speak , I charge you .
The earth hath bubbles , as the water has , And these are of them .
Whither are they vanished ?
Would they had stayed .
Were such things here as we do speak about ?
Or have we eaten on the insane root That takes the reason prisoner ?
Your children shall be kings .
You shall be king .
And thane of Cawdor too : went it not so ?
To the selfsame tune and words .
Who's here ?
How does my wife ?
Why , well .
And all my children ?
Well too .
How goes 't ?
Now is the time of help .
Gracious England hath Lent us good Siward and ten thousand men ; An older and a better soldier none That Christendom gives out .
Would I could answer This comfort with the like .
What concern they ?
If it be mine , Keep it not from me .
Quickly let me have it .
I guess at it .
Your castle is surprised , your wife and babes Savagely slaughtered .
Merciful heaven !
My children too ?
Wife , children , servants , all that could be found .
And I must be from thence !
My wife killed too ?
I have said .
Let's make us med'cines of our great revenge , To cure this deadly grief .
He has no children .
All my pretty ones ?
Did you say all ?
O hell-kite !
All ?
What , all my pretty chickens and their dam At one fell swoop ?
Dispute it like a man .
I can not but remember such things were That were most precious to me .
Did heaven look on , And would not take their part ?
Sinful Macduff , They were all struck for thee !
Naught that I am , Not for their own demerits , but for mine , Fell slaughter on their souls .
Heaven rest them now .
Be this the whetstone of your sword .
Let grief Convert to anger .
Oh , I could play the woman with mine eyes And braggart with my tongue !
But , gentle heavens , Cut short all intermission .
Front to front Bring thou this fiend of Scotland and myself .
Within my sword's length set him ; if he 'scape , Heaven forgive him too .
This tune goes manly .
Come , go we to the king .
Our power is ready ; Our lack is nothing but our leave .
Macbeth Is ripe for shaking , and the powers above Put on their instruments .
Receive what cheer you may .
I have two nights watched with you but can perceive no truth in your report .
When was it she last walked ?
Since his majesty went into the field , I have seen her rise from her bed , throw her nightgown upon her , unlock her closet , take forth paper , fold it , write upon 't , read it , afterwards seal it , and again return to bed ; yet all this while in a most fast sleep .
In this slumbery agitation , besides her walking and other actual performances , what , at any time , have you heard her say ?
That , sir , which I will not report after her .
Neither to you nor any one , having no witness to confirm my speech .
Lo you , here she comes .
This is her very guise ; and , upon my life , fast asleep .
Observe her , stand close .
How came she by that light ?
Why , it stood by her .
She has light by her continually .
Tis her command .
You see her eyes are open .
Ay , but their sense is shut .
What is it she does now ?
Look , how she rubs her hands .
It is an accustomed action with her to seem thus washing her hands .
Yet here's a spot .
Hark !
She speaks .
I will set down what comes from her , to satisfy my remembrance the more strongly .
Do you mark that ?
The thane of Fife had a wife .
Where is she now ? , What , will these hands ne'er be clean ? , No more o ' that , my lord , no more o ' that .
You have known what you should not .
She has spoke what she should not , I am sure of that .
Heaven knows what she has known .
Here's the smell of the blood still .
All the perfumes of Arabia will not sweeten this little hand .
Oh , Oh , Oh !
What a sigh is there !
The heart is sorely charged .
I would not have such a heart in my bosom for the dignity of the whole body .
Well , well , well .
Pray God it be , sir .
This disease is beyond my practice .
Yet I have known those which have walked in their sleep who have died holily in their beds .
Wash your hands .
Put on your nightgown .
Even so ?
To bed , to bed .
There's knocking at the gate .
Will she go now to bed ?
God , God forgive us all !
Good night , good doctor .
The English power is near , led on by Malcolm , His uncle Siward and the good Macduff .
Revenges burn in them , for their dear causes Would to the bleeding and the grim alarm Excite the mortified man .
Who knows if Donalbain be with his brother ?
For certain , sir , he is not .
I have a file Of all the gentry .
What does the tyrant ?
Great Dunsinane he strongly fortifies .
But , for certain , He can not buckle his distempered cause Within the belt of rule .
Who then shall blame His pestered senses to recoil and start , When all that is within him does condemn Itself for being there ?
Make we our march towards Birnam .
Silenced with that , In viewing o'er the rest o ' the selfsame day , He finds thee in the stout Norweyan ranks , Nothing afeard of what thyself didst make , Strange images of death .
As thick as tale Can post with post , and every one did bear Thy praises in his kingdom's great defense , And poured them down before him .
We are sent To give thee from our royal master thanks , Only to herald thee into his sight , Not pay thee .
Why do you dress me In borrowed robes ?
Whether he was combined With those of Norway , or did line the rebel With hidden help and vantage , or that with both He labored in his country's wrack , I know not ; But treasons capital , confessed and proved , Have overthrown him .
Bring me no more reports .
Till Birnam Wood remove to Dunsinane I can not taint with fear .
What's the boy Malcolm ?
Was he not born of woman ?
The spirits that know All mortal consequences have pronounced me thus : "Fear not , Macbeth .
No man that's born of woman Shall e'er have power upon thee." Then fly , false thanes , And mingle with the English epicures .
The mind I sway by and the heart I bear Shall never sag with doubt nor shake with fear .
The devil damn thee black , thou cream-faced loon !
Where got'st thou that goose look ?
There is ten thousand , Geese , villain ?
Soldiers , sir .
Go , prick thy face and over-red thy fear , Thou lily-livered boy .
What soldiers , patch ?
Death of thy soul !
Those linen cheeks of thine Are counselors to fear .
What soldiers , whey-face ?
The English force , so please you .
Take thy face hence .
Seyton ! , I am sick at heart , When I behold , Seyton , I say ! , This push Will cheer me ever , or disseat me now .
I have lived long enough .
Seyton !
What's your gracious pleasure ?
What news more ?
All is confirmed , my lord , which was reported .
I'll fight till from my bones my flesh be hacked .
Give me my armor .
Tis not needed yet .
I'll put it on .
Send out more horses .
Give me mine armor .
Not so sick , my lord , As she is troubled with thick-coming fancies That keep her from her rest .
Cure her of that .
Therein the patient Must minister to himself .
Throw physic to the dogs ; I'll none of it .
Come , put mine armor on .
Ay , my good lord .
Your royal preparation Makes us hear something .
Cousins , I hope the days are near at hand That chambers will be safe .
We doubt it nothing .
What wood is this before us ?
The wood of Birnam .
Let every soldier hew him down a bough And bear 't before him .
Thereby shall we shadow The numbers of our host and make discovery Err in report of us .
It shall be done .
We learn no other but the confident tyrant Keeps still in Dunsinane and will endure Our setting down before 't .
Hang out our banners on the outward walls .
The cry is still "They come ! " Our castle's strength Will laugh a siege to scorn .
Here let them lie Till famine and the ague eat them up .
Were they not forced with those that should be ours , We might have met them dareful , beard to beard , And beat them backward home .
What is that noise ?
It is the cry of women , my good lord .
I have almost forgot the taste of fears .
The time has been my senses would have cooled To hear a night-shriek , and my fell of hair Would at a dismal treatise rouse and stir As life were in 't .
Wherefore was that cry ?
The queen , my lord , is dead .
She should have died hereafter .
Tomorrow , and tomorrow , and tomorrow , Creeps in this petty pace from day to day To the last syllable of recorded time , And all our yesterdays have lighted fools The way to dusty death .
Out , out , brief candle !
It is a tale Told by an idiot , full of sound and fury , Signifying nothing .
Gracious my lord , I should report that which I say I saw , But know not how to do 't .
Well , say , sir .
As I did stand my watch upon the hill , I looked toward Birnam , and anon methought The wood began to move .
Liar and slave !
Let me endure your wrath , if 't be not so .
Within this three mile may you see it coming ; I say , a moving grove .
If thou speak'st false , Upon the next tree shall thou hang alive Till famine cling thee .
If thy speech be sooth , I care not if thou dost for me as much .
Now near enough .
Fare you well .
Do we but find the tyrant's power tonight , Let us be beaten if we can not fight .
They have tied me to a stake .
I can not fly , But , bearlike , I must fight the course .
What's he That was not born of woman ?
Such a one Am I to fear , or none .
What is thy name ?
Thou 'lt be afraid to hear it .
No , though thou call'st thyself a hotter name Than any is in hell .
My name's Macbeth .
The devil himself could not pronounce a title More hateful to mine ear .
No , nor more fearful .
Thou liest , abhorred tyrant .
But swords I smile at , weapons laugh to scorn , Brandished by man that's of a woman born .
But 'tis strange .
That way the noise is .
Tyrant , show thy face !
Either thou , Macbeth , Or else my sword with an unbattered edge I sheathe again undeeded .
There thou shouldst be ; By this great clatter , one of the greatest note Seems bruited .
This way , my lord .
The castle's gently rendered .
Enter , sir , the castle .
Turn , hellhound , turn !
But get thee back .
I have no words .
My voice is in my sword .
Thou bloodier villain Than terms can give thee out !
As easy mayst thou the intrenchant air With thy keen sword impress as make me bleed .
Let fall thy blade on vulnerable crests ; I bear a charmed life , which must not yield To one of woman born .
I'll not fight with thee .
Then yield thee , coward , And live to be the show and gaze o ' th ' time .
We'll have thee , as our rarer monsters are , Painted on a pole , and underwrit , "Here may you see the tyrant." I will not yield , To kiss the ground before young Malcolm's feet , And to be baited with the rabble's curse .
Though Birnam Wood be come to Dunsinane , And thou opposed , being of no woman born , Yet I will try the last .
Before my body I throw my warlike shield .
Lay on , Macduff , And damned be him that first cries , "Hold , enough ! " I would the friends we miss were safe arrived .
Some must go off .
Macduff is missing , and your noble son .
Your son , my lord , has paid a soldier's debt .
He only lived but till he was a man , The which no sooner had his prowess confirmed In the unshrinking station where he fought , But like a man he died .
Then he is dead ?
Ay , and brought off the field .
Your cause of sorrow Must not be measured by his worth , for then It hath no end .
Had he his hurts before ?
Ay , on the front .
Why then , God's soldier be he !
Had I as many sons as I have hairs , I would not wish them to a fairer death .
And so , his knell is knolled .
He's worth more sorrow , And that I'll spend for him .
He's worth no more .
They say he parted well and paid his score .
And so , God be with him !
Here comes newer comfort .
Hail , king !
For so thou art .
Behold where stands The usurper's cursed head .
The time is free .
Hail , King of Scotland !
My thanes and kinsmen , Henceforth be earls , the first that ever Scotland In such an honor named .
So , thanks to all at once and to each one , Whom we invite to see us crowned at Scone .
Look how our partner's rapt .
Worthy Macbeth , we stay upon your leisure .
Kind gentlemen , your pains Are registered where every day I turn The leaf to read them .
Let us toward the king .
Very gladly .
Till then , enough .
My liege , They are not yet come back .
But I have spoke With one that saw him die , who did report That very frankly he confessed his treasons , Implored your highness ' pardon , and set forth A deep repentance .
Nothing in his life Became him like the leaving it .
He died As one that had been studied in his death To throw away the dearest thing he owed As 'twere a careless trifle .
There's no art To find the mind's construction in the face .
Welcome hither .
So humbly take my leave .
My worthy Cawdor !
When shall we three meet again ?
In thunder , lightning , or in rain ?
That will be ere the set of sun .
Where the place ?
There to meet with Macbeth .
What thou wouldst highly , That wouldst thou holily ; wouldst not play false , And yet wouldst wrongly win .
Thou'ld'st have , great Glamis , That which cries , "Thus thou must do , " if thou have it , And that which rather thou dost fear to do , Than wishest should be undone .
What is your tidings ?
The king comes here tonight .
Thou 'rt mad to say it .
One of my fellows had the speed of him , Who , almost dead for breath , had scarcely more Than would make up his message .
Give him tending .
He brings great news .
My dearest love , Duncan comes here tonight .
And when goes hence ?
Tomorrow , as he purposes .
O , never Shall sun that morrow see !
Your face , my thane , is as a book where men May read strange matters .
Bear welcome in your eye , Your hand , your tongue .
Look like th ' innocent flower , But be the serpent under 't .
We will speak further .
Leave all the rest to me .
This castle hath a pleasant seat .
The air Nimbly and sweetly recommends itself Unto our gentle senses .
This guest of summer , The temple-haunting martlet , does approve , By his loved mansionry , that the heaven's breath Smells wooingly here .
No jutty , frieze , Buttress , nor coign of vantage , but this bird Hath made his pendant bed and procreant cradle .
Where they most breed and haunt , I have observed , The air is delicate .
See , see , our honored hostess !
The love that follows us sometime is our trouble , Which still we thank as love .
Fair and noble hostess , We are your guest tonight .
Your servants ever Have theirs , themselves , and what is theirs in compt , To make their audit at your highness ' pleasure , Still to return your own .
Give me your hand .
Conduct me to mine host .
We love him highly And shall continue our graces towards him .
By your leave , hostess .
If it were done when 'tis done , then 'twere well It were done quickly .
What news ?
He has almost supped .
Why have you left the chamber ?
Hath he asked for me ?
Know you not he has ?
We will proceed no further in this business .
He hath honored me of late , and I have bought Golden opinions from all sorts of people , Which would be worn now in their newest gloss , Not cast aside so soon .
Was the hope drunk Wherein you dressed yourself ?
From this time Such I account thy love .
Art thou afeard To be the same in thine own act and valor As thou art in desire ?
Wouldst thou have that Which thou esteem'st the ornament of life , And live a coward in thine own esteem , Letting "I dare not" wait upon "I would , " Like the poor cat i ' th ' adage ?
What beast was 't , then , That made you break this enterprise to me ?
What not put upon His spongy officers , who shall bear the guilt Of our great quell ?
Bring forth men-children only , For thy undaunted mettle should compose Nothing but males .
Will it not be received , When we have marked with blood those sleepy two Of his own chamber and used their very daggers , That they have done 't ?
Away , and mock the time with fairest show .
False face must hide what the false heart doth know .
How goes the night , boy ?
The moon is down .
I have not heard the clock .
And she goes down at twelve .
I take 't 'tis later , sir .
Hold , take my sword .
There's husbandry in heaven ; Their candles are all out .
Take thee that too .
A heavy summons lies like lead upon me , And yet I would not sleep .
Merciful powers , Restrain in me the cursed thoughts that nature Gives way to in repose .
Give me my sword .
Who's there ?
A friend .
What , sir , not yet at rest ?
The king's a-bed .
He hath been in unusual pleasure , and Sent forth great largess to your offices .
This diamond he greets your wife withal , By the name of most kind hostess , and shut up In measureless content .
Being unprepared , Our will became the servant to defect , Which else should free have wrought .
What bloody man is that ?
He can report , As seemeth by his plight , of the revolt The newest state .
This is the sergeant Who like a good and hardy soldier fought 'Gainst my captivity .
Hail , brave friend !
Say to the king the knowledge of the broil As thou didst leave it .
Doubtful it stood , As two spent swimmers that do cling together And choke their art .
O valiant cousin !
Worthy gentleman !
All's well .
I dreamt last night of the three weird sisters : To you they have showed some truth .
I think not of them .
Yet , when we can entreat an hour to serve , We would spend it in some words upon that business , If you would grant the time .
At your kind'st leisure .
If you shall cleave to my consent , when 'tis , It shall make honor for you .
Good repose the while !
Thanks , sir : the like to you !
Get thee to bed .
Is this a dagger which I see before me , The handle toward my hand ?
Whiles I threat , he lives .
Hear it not , Duncan , for it is a knell That summons thee to heaven or to hell .
That which hath made them drunk hath made me bold .
What hath quenched them hath given me fire .
Hark !
Peace !
My husband !
I have done the deed .
Didst thou not hear a noise ?
I heard the owl scream and the crickets cry .
Did not you speak ?
When ?
Now .
As I descended ?
Ay .
Hark !
Who lies i ' th ' second chamber ?
Donalbain .
A foolish thought , to say a sorry sight .
One cried , "God bless us ! " and "Amen" the other , As they had seen me with these hangman's hands .
List'ning their fear I could not say "Amen , " When they did say "God bless us ! " Consider it not so deeply .
But wherefore could not I pronounce "Amen" ?
I had most need of blessing , and "Amen" Stuck in my throat .
These deeds must not be thought After these ways .
So , it will make us mad .
Methought I heard a voice cry , "Sleep no more !
What do you mean ?
Still it cried , "Sleep no more ! " to all the house .
Go get some water , And wash this filthy witness from your hand .
Why did you bring these daggers from the place ?
They must lie there .
Go carry them and smear The sleepy grooms with blood .
Infirm of purpose !
Give me the daggers .
The sleeping and the dead Are but as pictures .
If he do bleed , I'll gild the faces of the grooms withal , For it must seem their guilt .
Whence is that knocking ?
How is 't with me when every noise appals me ?
I hear a knocking At the south entry .
Retire we to our chamber .
A little water clears us of this deed .
How easy is it , then !
Your constancy Hath left you unattended .
Hark !
More knocking .
Get on your nightgown , lest occasion call us And show us to be watchers .
Be not lost So poorly in your thoughts .
Wake Duncan with thy knocking .
I would thou couldst .
Knock , knock , knock !
Knock , knock !
Who's there , in th ' other devil's name ?
O , come in , equivocator .
Knock , knock , knock !
Who's there ?
Faith , here's an English tailor come hither for stealing out of a French hose .
Come in , tailor .
Here you may roast your goose .
Knock , knock !
Never at quiet .
What are you ?
But this place is too cold for hell .
I'll devil-porter it no further .
Anon , anon !
I pray you , remember the porter .
Was it so late , friend , ere you went to bed , That you do lie so late ?
What three things does drink especially provoke ?
Lechery , sir , it provokes and unprovokes .
It provokes the desire , but it takes away the performance .
I believe drink gave thee the lie last night .
Is thy master stirring ?
Our knocking has awaked him .
Here he comes .
Good morrow , noble sir .
Good morrow , both .
Is the king stirring , worthy thane ?
Not yet .
He did command me to call timely on him .
I have almost slipped the hour .
I'll bring you to him .
I know this is a joyful trouble to you , But yet 'tis one .
The labor we delight in physics pain .
This is the door .
I'll make so bold to call , For 'tis my limited service .
Goes the king hence today ?
He does .
He did appoint so .
The night has been unruly .
Where we lay , Our chimneys were blown down and , as they say , Lamentings heard i ' th ' air , strange screams of death , And prophesying with accents terrible Of dire combustion and confused events New hatched to the woeful time .
The obscure bird Clamored the livelong night .
Some say the Earth Was feverous and did shake .
Twas a rough night .
My young remembrance can not parallel A fellow to it .
O horror , horror , horror !
Tongue nor heart can not conceive nor name thee !
What's the matter ?
Confusion now hath made his masterpiece .
The life" ?
Mean you his majesty ?
Mark , King of Scotland , mark : No sooner justice had , with valor armed , Compelled these skipping kerns to trust their heels , But the Norweyan lord , surveying vantage , With furbished arms and new supplies of men , Began a fresh assault .
Dismayed not this our captains , Macbeth and Banquo ?
Yes , as sparrows eagles , or the hare the lion .
If I say sooth , I must report they were As cannons overcharged with double cracks , So they doubly redoubled strokes upon the foe .
So well thy words become thee as thy wounds ; They smack of honor both .
Go get him surgeons .
Who comes here ?
So should he look That seems to speak things strange .
Approach the chamber , and destroy your sight With a new Gorgon .
Do not bid me speak .
See , and then speak yourselves .
Awake , awake !
Ring the alarum bell .
Murder and treason !
Banquo and Donalbain !
Awake !
Shake off this downy sleep , death's counterfeit , And look on death itself !
Up , up , and see The great doom's image !
Malcolm !
Banquo !
As from your graves rise up , and walk like sprites , To countenance this horror !
Speak , speak !
O gentle lady , 'T is not for you to hear what I can speak : The repetition , in a woman's ear , Would murder as it fell .
O Banquo , Banquo , Our royal master's murdered !
Woe , alas !
What , in our house ?
Dear Duff , I prithee , contradict thyself , And say it is not so .
Had I but died an hour before this chance , I had lived a blessed time , for from this instant There's nothing serious in mortality .
All is but toys .
Renown and grace is dead .
The wine of life is drawn , and the mere lees Is left this vault to brag of .
What is amiss ?
You are , and do not know 't .
The spring , the head , the fountain of your blood Is stopped ; the very source of it is stopped .
Your royal father's murdered .
Oh , by whom ?
Those of his chamber , as it seemed , had done 't .
Their hands and faces were all badged with blood .
So were their daggers , which unwiped we found Upon their pillows .
They stared , and were distracted .
No man's life was to be trusted with them .
Oh , yet I do repent me of my fury , That I did kill them .
Wherefore did you so ?
Who can be wise , amazed , temp'rate , and furious , Loyal and neutral , in a moment ?
Here lay Duncan , His silver skin laced with his golden blood , And his gashed stabs looked like a breach in nature For ruin's wasteful entrance ; there , the murderers , Steeped in the colors of their trade , their daggers Unmannerly breeched with gore .
Who could refrain , That had a heart to love , and in that heart Courage to make 's love known ?
Help me hence , ho !
Look to the lady .
Fears and scruples shake us .
In the great hand of God I stand , and thence Against the undivulged pretense I fight Of treasonous malice .
And so do I .
So all .
Let's briefly put on manly readiness , And meet i ' th ' hall together .
Well contented .
What will you do ?
Let's not consort with them .
To show an unfelt sorrow is an office Which the false man does easy .
I'll to England .
To Ireland , I .
Our separated fortune Shall keep us both the safer .
Where we are , There's daggers in men's smiles .
The near in blood , The nearer bloody .
This murderous shaft that's shot Hath not yet lighted , and our safest way Is to avoid the aim .
There's warrant in that theft Which steals itself when there's no mercy left .
Threescore and ten I can remember well , Within the volume of which time I have seen Hours dreadful and things strange , but this sore night Hath trifled former knowings .
By th ' clock 'tis day , And yet dark night strangles the travelling lamp .
Tis said they eat each other .
They did so , to th ' amazement of mine eyes That looked upon 't .
Here comes the good Macduff .
How goes the world , sir , now ?
Why , see you not ?
Those that Macbeth hath slain .
They were suborned .
Malcolm and Donalbain , the king's two sons , Are stol'n away and fled , which puts upon them Suspicion of the deed .
Thriftless ambition , that will raven up Thine own lives ' means !
Then 'tis most like The sovereignty will fall upon Macbeth .
He is already named and gone to Scone To be invested .
Where is Duncan's body ?
Carried to Colmekill , The sacred storehouse of his predecessors , And guardian of their bones .
Will you to Scone ?
No , cousin , I'll to Fife .
Well , I will thither .
Well , may you see things well done there .
Adieu , Lest our old robes sit easier than our new !
Farewell , father .
God's benison go with you and with those That would make good of bad and friends of foes .
Yet it was said It should not stand in thy posterity , But that myself should be the root and father Of many kings .
If there come truth from them , As upon thee , Macbeth , their speeches shine , Why , by the verities on thee made good , May they not be my oracles as well , And set me up in hope ?
But hush , no more .
Here's our chief guest .
Let your highness Command upon me , to the which my duties Are with a most indissoluble tie Forever knit .
Ride you this afternoon ?
Ay , my good lord .
We should have else desired your good advice , Which still hath been both grave and prosperous , In this day's council , but we'll take tomorrow .
Is 't far you ride ?
As far , my lord , as will fill up the time 'Twixt this and supper .
Go not my horse the better , I must become a borrower of the night For a dark hour or twain .
Fail not our feast .
My lord , I will not .
But of that tomorrow , When therewithal we shall have cause of state Craving us jointly .
Hie you to horse .
Adieu , Till your return at night .
Goes Fleance with you ?
Ay , my good lord .
Our time does call upon 's .
Farewell .
Let every man be master of his time Till seven at night .
To make society The sweeter welcome , we will keep ourself Till suppertime alone .
While then , God be with you !
Bring them before us .
Our fears in Banquo Stick deep , and in his royalty of nature Reigns that which would be feared .
Tis much he dares , And to that dauntless temper of his mind He hath a wisdom that doth guide his valor To act in safety .
There is none but he Whose being I do fear , and under him My genius is rebuked , as it is said Mark Antony's was by Caesar .
Then , prophetlike , They hailed him father to a line of kings .
Who's there ?
God save the king .
Great happiness !
That now Sweno , the Norways ' king , craves composition .
Nor would we deign him burial of his men Till he disbursed at Saint Colme's Inch Ten thousand dollars to our general use .
No more that thane of Cawdor shall deceive Our bosom interest : go pronounce his present death , And with his former title greet Macbeth .
I'll see it done .
What he hath lost , noble Macbeth hath won .
Now go to the door and stay there till we call .
Was it not yesterday we spoke together ?
It was , so please your highness .
Well then , now Have you considered of my speeches ?
This I made good to you In our last conference , passed in probation with you , How you were borne in hand , how crossed , the instruments , Who wrought with them , and all things else that might To half a soul and to a notion crazed Say , "Thus did Banquo." You made it known to us .
I did so , and went further , which is now Our point of second meeting .
Do you find Your patience so predominant in your nature That you can let this go ?
Are you so gospeled To pray for this good man and for his issue , Whose heavy hand hath bowed you to the grave And beggared yours forever ?
We are men , my liege .
Ay , in the catalogue ye go for men , As hounds and greyhounds , mongrels , spaniels , curs , Shoughs , water-rugs , and demi-wolves are clept All by the name of dogs .
And so of men .
I am one , my liege , Whom the vile blows and buffets of the world Have so incensed that I am reckless what I do to spite the world .
And I another So weary with disasters , tugged with fortune , That I would set my life on any chance , To mend it or be rid on 't .
Both of you Know Banquo was your enemy .
True , my lord .
We shall , my lord , Perform what you command us .
Though our lives , Your spirits shine through you .
We are resolved , my lord .
I'll call upon you straight .
Abide within .
It is concluded .
Banquo , thy soul's flight , If it find heaven , must find it out tonight .
Is Banquo gone from court ?
Ay , madam , but returns again tonight .
Say to the king I would attend his leisure For a few words .
Madam , I will .
Naught's had , all's spent , Where our desire is got without content .
Tis safer to be that which we destroy Than by destruction dwell in doubtful joy .
How now , my lord !
What's done is done .
We have scorched the snake , not killed it .
She'll close and be herself whilst our poor malice Remains in danger of her former tooth .
Better be with the dead , Whom we , to gain our peace , have sent to peace , Than on the torture of the mind to lie In restless ecstasy .
Treason has done his worst ; nor steel nor poison , Malice domestic , foreign levy , nothing Can touch him further .
Come on , gentle my lord , Sleek o'er your rugged looks .
So shall I , love , And so , I pray , be you .
You must leave this .
Thou know'st that Banquo , and his Fleance , lives .
There's comfort yet ; they are assailable .
Then be thou jocund .
Ere the bat hath flown His cloistered flight , ere to black Hecate's summons The shard-borne beetle with his drowsy hums Hath rung night's yawning peal , there shall be done A deed of dreadful note .
What's to be done ?
What many men desire" , that "many" may be meant By the fool multitude that choose by show , Not learning more than the fond eye doth teach ; Which pries not to th ' interior , but like the martlet Builds in the weather on the outward wall , Even in the force and road of casualty .
I will not choose what many men desire Because I will not jump with common spirits And rank me with the barbarous multitudes .
Why then , to thee , thou silver treasure house .
Tell me once more what title thou dost bear .
Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves." And well said too , for who shall go about To cozen fortune and be honorable Without the stamp of merit ?
Let none presume To wear an undeserved dignity .
Oh , that estates , degrees and offices Were not derived corruptly , and that clear honor Were purchased by the merit of the wearer !
How many then should cover that stand bare !
How much low peasantry would then be gleaned From the true seed of honor !
Well , but to my choice .
Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves." I will assume desert. , Give me a key for this , And instantly unlock my fortunes here .
Too long a pause for that which you find there .
What's here ?
I will read it. , How much unlike art thou to Portia !
Who chooseth me shall have as much as he deserves" !
Did I deserve no more than a fool's head ?
Is that my prize ?
Are my deserts no better ?
What is here ?
The fire seven times tried this , Seven times tried that judgment is , That did never choose amiss .
Some there be that shadows kiss .
Such have but a shadow's bliss .
There be fools alive , iwis , Silvered o'er , and so was this .
Take what wife you will to bed , I will ever be your head .
So be gone .
With one fool's head I came to woo , But I go away with two. , Sweet , adieu .
I'll keep my oath Patiently to bear my wroth."
Thus hath the candle singed the moth .
O these deliberate fools !
When they do choose , They have the wisdom by their wit to lose .
The ancient saying is no heresy .
Hanging and wiving goes by destiny .
Come , draw the curtain , Nerissa .
Where is my lady ?
Here .
What would my lord ?
Yet I have not seen So likely an ambassador of love .
No more , I pray thee .
I am half afeard Thou wilt say anon he is some kin to thee , Thou spend'st such high-day wit in praising him. , Come , come , Nerissa , for I long to see Quick Cupid's post that comes so mannerly .
Now , what news on the Rialto ?
But it is true , without any slips of prolixity or crossing the plain highway of talk , that the good Antonio , the honest Antonio , oh , that I had a title good enough to keep his name company ! , Come , the full stop .
Ha , what sayest thou ?
Why , the end is he hath lost a ship .
I would it might prove the end of his losses .
Let me say "Amen" betimes , lest the devil cross my prayer , for here he comes in the likeness of a Jew .
How now , Shylock ?
What news among the merchants ?
You knew , none so well , none so well as you , of my daughter's flight .
That's certain .
I , for my part , knew the tailor that made the wings she flew withal .
She is damned for it .
That's certain , if the devil may be her judge .
My own flesh and blood to rebel !
Out upon it , old carrion !
Rebels it at these years ?
I say my daughter is my flesh and blood .
But tell us , do you hear whether Antonio have had any loss at sea or no ?
Well , we will leave you then till dinnertime .
I must be one of these same dumb wise men , For Gratiano never lets me speak .
Well , keep me company but two years more , Thou shalt not know the sound of thine own tongue .
Farewell .
I'll grow a talker for this gear .
Is that any thing now ?
Gratiano speaks an infinite deal of nothing , more than any man in all Venice .
Well , tell me now what lady is the same To whom you swore a secret pilgrimage , That you today promised to tell me of ?
There I have another bad match ! , a bankrupt , a prodigal who dare scarce show his head on the Rialto , a beggar that was used to come so smug upon the mart .
Let him look to his bond .
He was wont to call me usurer ; let him look to his bond .
He was wont to lend money for a Christian courtesy ; let him look to his bond .
Why , I am sure , if he forfeit thou wilt not take his flesh .
What's that good for ?
To bait fish withal .
He hath disgraced me and hindered me half a million , laughed at my losses , mocked at my gains , scorned my nation , thwarted my bargains , cooled my friends , heated mine enemies , and what's his reason ?
I am a Jew .
Hath not a Jew eyes ?
Hath not a Jew hands , organs , dimensions , senses , affections , passions ?
Fed with the same food , hurt with the same weapons , subject to the same diseases , healed by the same means , warmed and cooled by the same winter and summer as a Christian is ?
If you prick us , do we not bleed ?
If you tickle us , do we not laugh ?
If you poison us , do we not die ?
And if you wrong us , shall we not revenge ?
If we are like you in the rest , we will resemble you in that .
If a Jew wrong a Christian , what is his humility ?
Revenge .
We have been up and down to seek him .
Here comes another of the tribe .
A third can not be matched unless the devil himself turn Jew .
How now , Tubal ?
What news from Genoa ?
Hast thou found my daughter ?
I often came where I did hear of her , but can not find her .
Why , there , there , there , there !
I never felt it till now , Two thousand ducats in that , and other precious , precious jewels .
I would my daughter were dead at my foot and the jewels in her ear !
Would she were hearsed at my foot and the ducats in her coffin !
No news of them ?
Why , so .
And I know not what's spent in the search .
Why thou , loss upon loss !
Yes , other men have ill luck too .
Antonio , as I heard in Genoa , What , what , what ?
Ill luck , ill luck ?
Hath an argosy cast away coming from Tripolis .
I thank God , I thank God !
Is 't true , is 't true ?
I spoke with some of the sailors that escaped the wrack .
I thank thee , good Tubal .
Good news , good news !
Ha , ha , heard in Genoa .
Your daughter spent in Genoa , as I heard , in one night fourscore ducats .
Thou stickest a dagger in me .
I shall never see my gold again .
Fourscore ducats at a sitting !
Fourscore ducats !
There came divers of Antonio's creditors in my company to Venice that swear he can not choose but break .
I am very glad of it .
I'll plague him .
I'll torture him .
I am glad of it .
One of them showed me a ring that he had of your daughter for a monkey .
Out upon her !
Thou torturest me , Tubal .
It was my turquoise .
I had it of Leah when I was a bachelor .
I would not have given it for a wilderness of monkeys .
But Antonio is certainly undone .
Nay , that's true , that's very true .
Bespeak him a fortnight before. , I will have the heart of him if he forfeit , for were he out of Venice I can make what merchandise I will. , Go , go , Tubal , and meet me at our synagogue .
Go , good Tubal .
At our synagogue , Tubal .
Before you hazard , for in choosing wrong I lose your company .
Therefore forbear awhile .
There may as well be amity and life 'Tween snow and fire , as treason and my love .
Promise me life , and I'll confess the truth .
Well then , confess and live .
Confess and love" Had been the very sum of my confession .
But let me to my fortune and the caskets .
Away , then .
I am locked in one of them .
If you do love me you will find me out. , Nerissa and the rest , stand all aloof .
Let music sound while he doth make his choice .
Then if he lose he makes a swanlike end , Fading in music .
He may win , And what is music then ?
The rest aloof are the Dardanian wives , With bleared visages come forth to view The issue of th ' exploit. , Go , Hercules !
Live thou , I live .
With much , much more dismay I view the fight than thou that makest the fray .
Ding , dong , bell .
How many cowards whose hearts are all as false As stairs of sand wear yet upon their chins The beards of Hercules and frowning Mars , Who , inward searched , have livers white as milk , And these assume but valor's excrement To render them redoubted .
So are those crisped snaky golden locks Which maketh such wanton gambols with the wind , Upon supposed fairness , often known To be the dowry of a second head , The skull that bred them in the sepulcher .
Thus ornament is but the guiled shore To a most dangerous sea , the beauteous scarf Veiling an Indian beauty , in a word , The seeming truth which cunning times put on To entrap the wisest .
Therefore then , thou gaudy gold , Hard food for Midas , I will none of thee .
Since this fortune falls to you , Be content and seek no new .
If you be well pleased with this And hold your fortune for your bliss , Turn you where your lady is And claim her with a loving kiss."
A gentle scroll .
Fair lady , by your leave , I come by note to give and to receive .
Like one of two contending in a prize That thinks he hath done well in people's eyes , Hearing applause and universal shout , Giddy in spirit , still gazing in a doubt Whether these pearls of praise be his or no , So , thrice fair lady , stand I even so , As doubtful whether what I see be true Until confirmed , signed , ratified by you .
You see me , Lord Bassanio , where I stand Such as I am .
Though for myself alone I would not be ambitious in my wish To wish myself much better , yet for you I would be trebled twenty times myself , A thousand times more fair , ten thousand times more rich , That only to stand high in your account I might in virtue , beauties , livings , friends Exceed account .
Happier than this , She is not bred so dull but she can learn .
Happiest of all is that her gentle spirit Commits itself to yours to be directed As from her lord , her governor , her king .
Myself and what is mine to you and yours Is now converted .
But now I was the lord Of this fair mansion , master of my servants , Queen o'er myself .
And even now , but now , This house , these servants , and this same myself Are yours , my lord's .
I give them with this ring , Which when you part from , lose , or give away , Let it presage the ruin of your love
I pray you , good Bassanio , let me know it .
And if it stand , as you yourself still do , Within the eye of honor , be assured My purse , my person , my extremest means Lie all unlocked to your occasions .
In my school days , when I had lost one shaft , I shot his fellow of the selfsame flight The selfsame way with more advised watch To find the other forth , and by adventuring both , I oft found both .
I urge this childhood proof Because what follows is pure innocence .
I owe you much , and , like a willful youth , That which I owe is lost .
You know me well , and herein spend but time To wind about my love with circumstance .
And out of doubt you do me now more wrong In making question of my uttermost Than if you had made waste of all I have .
Then do but say to me what I should do That in your knowledge may by me be done , And I am pressed unto it .
Therefore speak .
O , then be bold to say Bassanio's dead !
My lord and lady , it is now our time , That have stood by and seen our wishes prosper , To cry , "Good joy , good joy , my lord and lady ! " My Lord Bassanio and my gentle lady , I wish you all the joy that you can wish , For I am sure you can wish none from me .
And when your honors mean to solemnize The bargain of your faith , I do beseech you Even at that time I may be married too .
With all my heart , so thou canst get a wife .
I thank your lordship , you have got me one .
What , and stake down ?
What , and my old Venetian friend Salerio ?
Lorenzo and Salerio , welcome hither , If that the youth of my new interest here Have power to bid you welcome .
So do I , my lord .
They are entirely welcome .
And I have reason for it .
Signor Antonio Commends him to you .
Ere I ope his letter , I pray you tell me how my good friend doth .
Not sick , my lord , unless it be in mind , Nor well , unless in mind .
His letter there Will show you his estate .
There are some shrewd contents in yond same paper That steals the color from Bassanio's cheek .
Some dear friend dead , else nothing in the world Could turn so much the constitution Of any constant man .
What , worse and worse ? , With leave , Bassanio , I am half yourself , And I must freely have the half of anything That this same paper brings you .
O sweet Portia , Here are a few of the unpleasant'st words That ever blotted paper .
Gentle lady , When I did first impart my love to you , I freely told you , all the wealth I had Ran in my veins .
I was a gentleman , And then I told you true .
When I told you My state was nothing , I should then have told you That I was worse than nothing , for indeed I have engaged myself to a dear friend , Engaged my friend to his mere enemy To feed my means .
Have all his ventures failed ?
What , not one hit ?
Not one , my lord .
Besides , it should appear that if he had The present money to discharge the Jew , He would not take it .
Never did I know A creature that did bear the shape of man So keen and greedy to confound a man .
He plies the duke at morning and at night , And doth impeach the freedom of the state If they deny him justice .
When I was with him I have heard him swear To Tubal and to Chus , his countrymen , That he would rather have Antonio's flesh Than twenty times the value of the sum That he did owe him .
And I know , my lord , If law , authority , and power deny not , It will go hard with poor Antonio .
Is it your dear friend that is thus in trouble ?
What sum owes he the Jew ?
For me , three thousand ducats .
What , no more ?
Pay him six thousand and deface the bond !
You shall have gold To pay the petty debt twenty times over .
When it is paid , bring your true friend along .
My maid Nerissa and myself meantime Will live as maids and widows .
Bid your friends welcome , show a merry cheer .
But let me hear the letter of your friend .
Sweet Bassanio , my ships have all miscarried .
My creditors grow cruel .
My estate is very low .
My bond to the Jew is forfeit .
Notwithstanding , use your pleasure .
If your love do not persuade you to come , let not my letter." O love , dispatch all business and be gone !
Since I have your good leave to go away , I will make haste .
But till I come again , No bed shall e'er be guilty of my stay , No rest be interposer 'twixt us twain .
Jailer , look to him .
This is the fool that lent out money gratis .
Jailer , look to him .
Hear me yet , good Shylock .
I pray thee , hear me speak .
I'll have my bond .
I will not hear thee speak .
I'll have my bond , and therefore speak no more .
I'll not be made a soft and dull-eyed fool To shake the head , relent and sigh , and yield To Christian intercessors .
Follow not .
I'll have no speaking .
I will have my bond .
It is the most impenetrable cur That ever kept with men .
Let him alone .
I'll follow him no more with bootless prayers .
He seeks my life .
His reason well I know .
I oft delivered from his forfeitures Many that have at times made moan to me .
Therefore he hates me .
I am sure the duke Will never grant this forfeiture to hold .
Therefore go .
These griefs and losses have so bated me , That I shall hardly spare a pound of flesh Tomorrow to my bloody creditor. , Well , jailer , on. , Pray God Bassanio come To see me pay his debt , and then I care not .
Lorenzo , I commit into your hands The husbandry and manage of my house Until my lord's return .
Madam , with all my heart .
I shall obey you in all fair commands .
My people do already know my mind And will acknowledge you and Jessica In place of Lord Bassanio and myself .
So fare you well till we shall meet again .
Fare you well , Jessica .
Now , Balthazar , As I have ever found thee honest true , So let me find thee still .
Sometimes from her eyes I did receive fair speechless messages .
Her name is Portia , nothing undervalued To Cato's daughter , Brutus ' Portia .
I shall be there before thee .
Madam , I go with all convenient speed .
Come on , Nerissa , I have work in hand That you yet know not of .
We'll see our husbands Before they think of us .
Shall they see us ?
They shall , Nerissa , but in such a habit That they shall think we are accomplished With that we lack .
And twenty of these puny lies I'll tell , That men shall swear I have discontinued school Above a twelvemonth .
I have within my mind A thousand raw tricks of these bragging jacks Which I will practice .
Why , shall we turn to men ?
Fie , what a question's that If thou wert near a lewd interpreter !
But come , I'll tell thee all my whole device When I am in my coach , which stays for us At the park gate .
And therefore haste away , For we must measure twenty miles today .
Yes , truly , for look you , the sins of the father are to be laid upon the children .
Therefore I promise ye I fear you .
I was always plain with you , and so now I speak my agitation of the matter .
Therefore be o ' good cheer , for truly I think you are damned .
There is but one hope in it that can do you any good , and that is but a kind of bastard hope neither .
And what hope is that , I pray thee ?
Marry , you may partly hope that your father got you not , that you are not the Jew's daughter .
That were a kind of bastard hope indeed .
So the sins of my mother should be visited upon me .
Truly then I fear you are damned both by father and mother .
Thus when I shun Scylla your father , I fall into Charybdis your mother .
Well , you are gone both ways .
I shall be saved by my husband .
He hath made me a Christian .
Truly , the more to blame he .
We were Christians eno ' before , e'en as many as could well live one by another .
This making Christians will raise the price of hogs .
If we grow all to be pork-eaters , we shall not shortly have a rasher on the coals for money .
I'll tell my husband , Launcelot , what you say .
Here he comes .
I shall grow jealous of you shortly , Launcelot , if you thus get my wife into corners .
Nay , you need not fear us , Lorenzo .
Launcelot and I are out .
He tells me flatly there is no mercy for me in heaven because I am a Jew's daughter , and he says you are no good member of the commonwealth , for in converting Jews to Christians you raise the price of pork .
I shall answer that better to the commonwealth than you can the getting up of the Negro's belly .
It is much that the Moor should be more than reason .
I think the best grace of wit will shortly turn into silence , and discourse grow commendable in none only but parrots .
That is done , sir .
They have all stomachs .
Goodly Lord , what a wit-snapper are you !
Wilt thou show the whole wealth of thy wit in an instant ?
For the table , sir , it shall be served in .
For the meat , sir , it shall be covered .
For your coming in to dinner , sir , why , let it be as humours and conceits shall govern .
O dear discretion , how his words are suited !
How cheerest thou , Jessica ?
How dost thou like the Lord Bassanio's wife ?
Past all expressing .
And if on earth he do not merit it , In reason he should never come to heaven .
Why , if two gods should play some heavenly match And on the wager lay two earthly women , And Portia one , there must be something else Pawned with the other , for the poor rude world Hath not her fellow .
Even such a husband Hast thou of me as she is for a wife .
First let us go to dinner .
Nay , let me praise you while I have a stomach .
No , pray thee , let it serve for table talk .
What , is Antonio here ?
Ready , so please your grace .
I am sorry for thee .
Thou art come to answer A stony adversary , an inhuman wretch Uncapable of pity , void and empty From any dram of mercy .
I have heard Your grace hath ta'en great pains to qualify His rigorous course .
But since he stands obdurate And that no lawful means can carry me Out of his envy's reach , I do oppose My patience to his fury , and am armed To suffer with a quietness of spirit The very tyranny and rage of his .
Go , one , and call the Jew into the court .
He is ready at the door .
He comes , my lord .
We all expect a gentle answer , Jew .
I have possessed your grace of what I purpose , And by our holy Sabbath have I sworn To have the due and forfeit of my bond .
If you deny it , let the danger light Upon your charter and your city's freedom .
You'll ask me why I rather choose to have A weight of carrion flesh than to receive Three thousand ducats .
I'll not answer that But say it is my humour .
Is it answered ?
What if my house be troubled with a rat And I be pleased to give ten thousand ducats To have it baned ?
What , are you answered yet ?
Some men there are love not a gaping pig , Some that are mad if they behold a cat , And others , when the bagpipe sings i ' th ' nose , Can not contain their urine .
Are you answered ?
This is no answer , thou unfeeling man , To excuse the current of thy cruelty .
I am not bound to please thee with my answers .
Do all men kill the things they do not love ?
What , wouldst thou have a serpent sting thee twice ?
You may as well do anything most hard , As seek to soften that , than which what's harder ? , His Jewish heart .
I would have my bond .
How shalt thou hope for mercy , rendering none ?
What judgment shall I dread , doing no wrong ?
You have among you many a purchased slave , Which , like your asses and your dogs and mules , You use in abject and in slavish parts Because you bought them .
Shall I say to you , "Let them be free !
Marry them to your heirs !
Why sweat they under burdens ?
Let their beds Be made as soft as yours and let their palates Be seasoned with such viands" ?
You will answer , "The slaves are ours." So do I answer you .
The pound of flesh which I demand of him Is dearly bought .
Tis mine and I will have it .
If you deny me , fie upon your law , There is no force in the decrees of Venice .
I stand for judgment .
By my troth , Nerissa , my little body is aweary of this great world .
And yet for aught I see , they are as sick that surfeit with too much as they that starve with nothing .
It is no mean happiness , therefore , to be seated in the mean .
Good sentences , and well pronounced .
They would be better if well followed .
It is a good divine that follows his own instructions .
But this reasoning is not in the fashion to choose me a husband .
Is it not hard , Nerissa , that I can not choose one nor refuse none ?
Upon my power I may dismiss this court , Unless Bellario , a learned doctor , Whom I have sent for to determine this , Come here today .
Bring us the letter .
Call the messenger .
Good cheer , Antonio !
What , man , courage yet !
The Jew shall have my flesh , blood , bones and all , Ere thou shalt lose for me one drop of blood .
I am a tainted wether of the flock , Meetest for death .
The weakest kind of fruit Drops earliest to the ground , and so let me .
You can not better be employed , Bassanio , Than to live still and write mine epitaph .
Came you from Padua , from Bellario ?
From both , my lord .
Bellario greets your grace .
To cut the forfeiture from that bankrupt there .
Not on thy sole , but on thy soul , harsh Jew , Thou makest thy knife keen .
But no metal can , No , not the hangman's axe , bear half the keenness Of thy sharp envy .
Can no prayers pierce thee ?
No , none that thou hast wit enough to make .
Thou almost makest me waver in my faith To hold opinion with Pythagoras That souls of animals infuse themselves Into the trunks of men .
Thy currish spirit Governed a wolf who , hanged for human slaughter , Even from the gallows did his fell soul fleet , And whilst thou layest in thy unhallowed dam Infused itself in thee , for thy desires Are wolvish , bloody , starved , and ravenous .
Till thou canst rail the seal from off my bond , Thou but offend'st thy lungs to speak so loud .
Repair thy wit , good youth , or it will fall To cureless ruin .
I stand here for law .
This letter from Bellario doth commend A young and learned doctor to our court .
Where is he ?
He attendeth here hard by To know your answer whether you'll admit him .
With all my heart. , Some three or four of you Go give him courteous conduct to this place. , Meantime the court shall hear Bellario's letter .
His name is Balthazar .
I leave him to your gracious acceptance , whose trial shall better publish his commendation." You hear the learned Bellario , what he writes .
Come you from old Bellario ?
I did , my lord .
You are welcome .
Take your place .
Are you acquainted with the difference That holds this present question in the court ?
I am informed thoroughly of the cause .
Antonio and old Shylock , both stand forth .
Is your name Shylock ?
Shylock is my name .
Of a strange nature is the suit you follow , Yet in such rule that the Venetian law Can not impugn you as you do proceed. , Ay , so he says .
Do you confess the bond ?
I do .
Then must the Jew be merciful .
On what compulsion must I ?
Tell me that .
The quality of mercy is not strained .
It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven Upon the place beneath .
It is twice blessed : It blesseth him that gives and him that takes .
Tis mightiest in the mightiest .
It becomes The throned monarch better than his crown .
And earthly power doth then show likest God's When mercy seasons justice .
I have spoke thus much To mitigate the justice of thy plea , Which if thou follow , this strict court of Venice Must needs give sentence 'gainst the merchant there .
My deeds upon my head .
I crave the law , The penalty , and forfeit of my bond .
Is he not able to discharge the money ?
If that will not suffice , I will be bound to pay it ten times o'er , On forfeit of my hands , my head , my heart .
There is no power in Venice Can alter a decree established .
Twill be recorded for a precedent , And many an error by the same example Will rush into the state .
It can not be .
I pray you , let me look upon the bond .
Shylock , there's thrice thy money offered thee .
An oath , an oath , I have an oath in heaven .
Shall I lay perjury upon my soul ?
No , not for Venice .
And lawfully by this the Jew may claim A pound of flesh to be by him cut off Nearest the merchant's heart. , Be merciful .
Take thrice thy money .
Bid me tear the bond .
When it is paid according to the tenor .
It doth appear you are a worthy judge .
You know the law .
I charge you by the law , Whereof you are a well-deserving pillar , Proceed to judgment .
By my soul I swear There is no power in the tongue of man To alter me .
I stay here on my bond .
Most heartily I do beseech the court To give the judgment .
Why then , thus it is : You must prepare your bosom for his knife .
O noble judge !
O excellent young man !
For the intent and purpose of the law Hath full relation to the penalty , Which here appeareth due upon the bond .
Tis very true .
O wise and upright judge !
How much more elder art thou than thy looks !
Ay , his breast .
Nearest his heart" , those are the very words .
It is so .
Are there balance here to weigh The flesh ?
I have them ready .
Have by some surgeon , Shylock , on your charge , To stop his wounds lest he do bleed to death .
Is it so nominated in the bond ?
It is not so expressed , but what of that ?
Twere good you do so much for charity .
I can not find it .
Tis not in the bond .
But little .
I am armed and well prepared. , Give me your hand , Bassanio .
Fare you well .
Grieve not that I am fall'n to this for you , For herein Fortune shows herself more kind Than is her custom .
Repent but you that you shall lose your friend , And he repents not that he pays your debt .
For if the Jew do cut but deep enough , I'll pay it presently with all my heart .
Antonio , I am married to a wife Which is as dear to me as life itself .
But life itself , my wife , and all the world Are not with me esteemed above thy life .
I would lose all , ay , sacrifice them all Here to this devil , to deliver you .
Your wife would give you little thanks for that If she were by to hear you make the offer .
I have a wife , whom I protest I love .
I would she were in heaven , so she could Entreat some power to change this currish Jew .
Tis well you offer it behind her back .
These be the Christian husbands .
I have a daughter .
The court awards it , and the law doth give it .
Most rightful judge !
And you must cut this flesh from off his breast .
The law allows it , and the court awards it .
Most learned judge , a sentence !
Come , prepare .
Tarry a little .
There is something else .
This bond doth give thee here no jot of blood .
The words expressly are "a pound of flesh." Take then thy bond , take thou thy pound of flesh , But in the cutting it if thou dost shed One drop of Christian blood , thy lands and goods Are by the laws of Venice confiscate Unto the state of Venice .
Is that the law ?
Thyself shalt see the act .
For as thou urgest justice , be assured Thou shalt have justice more than thou desirest .
I take this offer then : pay the bond thrice And let the Christian go .
Here is the money .
Soft !
The Jew shall have all justice .
Soft , no haste .
He shall have nothing but the penalty .
Therefore prepare thee to cut off the flesh .
Shed thou no blood , nor cut thou less nor more But just a pound of flesh .
If thou takest more Or less than a just pound , be it but so much As makes it light or heavy in the substance Or the division of the twentieth part Of one poor scruple , nay , if the scale do turn But in the estimation of a hair , Thou diest and all thy goods are confiscate .
A second Daniel ! , A Daniel , Jew !
Now , infidel , I have you on the hip .
Why doth the Jew pause ?
Take thy forfeiture .
Give me my principal , and let me go .
I have it ready for thee .
Here it is .
Your father was ever virtuous , and holy men at their death have good inspirations .
I pray thee , overname them .
First , there is the Neapolitan prince .
I am much afeard my lady his mother played false with a smith .
Then there is the County Palatine .
He doth nothing but frown , as who should say , "An you will not have me , choose." He hears merry tales and smiles not .
I fear he will prove the weeping philosopher when he grows old , being so full of unmannerly sadness in his youth .
I had rather be married to a death's-head with a bone in his mouth than to either of these .
God defend me from these two !
How say you by the French lord , Monsieur le Bon ?
He hath refused it in the open court .
He shall have merely justice and his bond .
Thou shalt have nothing but the forfeiture To be so taken at thy peril , Jew .
Why then , the devil give him good of it !
I'll stay no longer question .
Tarry , Jew .
The law hath yet another hold on you .
It is enacted in the laws of Venice , If it be proved against an alien That by direct or indirect attempts He seek the life of any citizen , The party 'gainst the which he doth contrive Shall seize one half his goods .
The other half Comes to the privy coffer of the state , And the offender's life lies in the mercy Of the Duke only 'gainst all other voice .
Down , therefore , and beg mercy of the Duke .
Therefore thou must be hanged at the state's charge .
That thou shalt see the difference of our spirit , I pardon thee thy life before thou ask it .
For half thy wealth , it is Antonio's .
The other half comes to the general state , Which humbleness may drive unto a fine .
Ay , for the state , not for Antonio .
Nay , take my life and all .
Pardon not that .
You take my house when you do take the prop That doth sustain my house .
You take my life When you do take the means whereby I live .
What mercy can you render him , Antonio ?
A halter gratis , nothing else , for God's sake .
So please my lord the duke and all the court , To quit the fine for one half of his goods I am content , so he will let me have The other half in use to render it Upon his death unto the gentleman That lately stole his daughter .
Two things provided more : that for this favor He presently become a Christian ; The other , that he do record a gift Here in the court , of all he dies possessed , Unto his son Lorenzo and his daughter .
He shall do this , or else I do recant The pardon that I late pronounced here .
Art thou contented , Jew ?
What dost thou say ?
I am content .
I pray you , give me leave to go from hence .
I am not well .
Send the deed after me , And I will sign it .
Get thee gone , but do it .
I must away this night toward Padua , And it is meet I presently set forth .
I am sorry that your leisure serves you not. , Antonio , gratify this gentleman , For in my mind you are much bound to him .
And stand indebted , over and above , In love and service to you evermore .
He is well paid that is well satisfied .
And I , delivering you , am satisfied , And therein do account myself well paid .
My mind was never yet more mercenary .
I pray you , know me when we meet again .
I wish you well , and so I take my leave .
Take some remembrance of us as a tribute , Not as a fee .
This ring , good sir , alas , it is a trifle .
I will not shame myself to give you this .
I will have nothing else but only this .
And now methinks I have a mind to it .
There's more depends on this than on the value .
The dearest ring in Venice will I give you , And find it out by proclamation .
Only for this , I pray you , pardon me .
I see , sir , you are liberal in offers .
You taught me first to beg , and now methinks You teach me how a beggar should be answered .
Good sir , this ring was given me by my wife .
And when she put it on , she made me vow That I should neither sell nor give nor lose it .
That 'scuse serves many men to save their gifts .
An if your wife be not a madwoman , And know how well I have deserved the ring , She would not hold out enemy forever For giving it to me .
Well , peace be with you .
My Lord Bassanio , let him have the ring .
Come , you and I will thither presently .
And in the morning early will we both Fly toward Belmont .
Come , Antonio .
Inquire the Jew's house out .
Give him this deed , And let him sign it .
We'll away tonight , And be a day before our husbands home .
This deed will be well welcome to Lorenzo .
Furthermore , I pray you show my youth old Shylock's house .
That will I do .
Away , make haste .
Thou know'st where I will tarry .
The moon shines bright .
In such a night as this , When the sweet wind did gently kiss the trees And they did make no noise , in such a night Troilus methinks mounted the Trojan walls And sighed his soul toward the Grecian tents Where Cressid lay that night .
In such a night Did young Lorenzo swear he loved her well , Stealing her soul with many vows of faith , And ne'er a true one .
In such a night Did pretty Jessica , like a little shrew , Slander her love , and he forgave it her .
But , hark , I hear the footing of a man .
Who comes so fast in silence of the night ?
A friend .
A friend ?
What friend ?
Your name , I pray you , friend ?
Stephano is my name , and I bring word My mistress will before the break of day Be here at Belmont .
She doth stray about By holy crosses , where she kneels and prays For happy wedlock hours .
Who comes with her ?
None but a holy hermit and her maid .
I pray you , is my master yet returned ?
Sola , sola !
Wo , ha , ho !
Sola , sola !
Who calls ?
Sola !
Did you see Master Lorenzo ?
Leave holloaing , man .
Here .
Sola !
Where , where ?
Here .
Tell him there's a post come from my master with his horn full of good news .
My master will be here ere morning .
Sweet soul , let's in , and there expect their coming .
And yet no matter .
God made him and therefore let him pass for a man .
In truth , I know it is a sin to be a mocker , but he ! , why , he hath a horse better than the Neapolitan's , a better bad habit of frowning than the Count Palatine .
What say you then to Falconbridge , the young baron of England ?
You know I say nothing to him , for he understands not me , nor I him .
He hath neither Latin , French , nor Italian , and you will come into the court and swear that I have a poor pennyworth in the English .
He is a proper man's picture , but alas , who can converse with a dumb show ?
How oddly he is suited !
I think he bought his doublet in Italy , his round hose in France , his bonnet in Germany , and his behavior everywhere .
What think you of the Scottish lord , his neighbor ?
How sweet the moonlight sleeps upon this bank !
Here will we sit and let the sounds of music Creep in our ears .
Soft stillness and the night Become the touches of sweet harmony .
Sit , Jessica .
Look how the floor of heaven Is thick inlaid with patens of bright gold .
Come ho , and wake Diana with a hymn !
With sweetest touches pierce your mistress ' ear , And draw her home with music .
I am never merry when I hear sweet music .
The motions of his spirit are dull as night , And his affections dark as Erebus .
Let no such man be trusted .
Mark the music .
That light we see is burning in my hall .
How far that little candle throws his beams !
So shines a good deed in a naughty world .
When the moon shone we did not see the candle .
So doth the greater glory dim the less .
A substitute shines brightly as a king Until a king be by , and then his state Empties itself , as doth an inland brook Into the main of waters .
Music , hark .
It is your music , madam , of the house .
Nothing is good , I see , without respect .
How many things by season seasoned are To their right praise and true perfection !
Peace !
How the moon sleeps with Endymion And would not be awaked .
That is the voice , Or I am much deceived , of Portia .
He knows me as the blind man knows the cuckoo , By the bad voice .
Dear lady , welcome home .
We have been praying for our husbands ' welfare , Which speed , we hope , the better for our words .
Are they returned ?
Go in , Nerissa .
Give order to my servants that they take No note at all of our being absent hence. , Nor you , Lorenzo. , Jessica , nor you .
I hear his trumpet .
This night methinks is but the daylight sick .
It looks a little paler .
Tis a day Such as the day is when the sun is hid .
I thank you , madam .
Give welcome to my friend .
This is the man , this is Antonio , To whom I am so infinitely bound .
Sir , you are very welcome to our house .
It must appear in other ways than words , Therefore I scant this breathing courtesy .
A quarrel , ho , already ?
What's the matter ?
About a hoop of gold , a paltry ring That she did give me , whose posy was For all the world like cutler's poetry Upon a knife , "Love me and leave me not." What talk you of the posy or the value ?
You swore to me when I did give it you That you would wear it till your hour of death , And that it should lie with you in your grave .
Gave it a judge's clerk !
He will , an if he live to be a man .
Ay , if a woman live to be a man .
I could not for my heart deny it him .
You were to blame , I must be plain with you , To part so slightly with your wife's first gift , A thing stuck on with oaths upon your finger And so riveted with faith unto your flesh .
I gave my love a ring and made him swear Never to part with it .
And here he stands .
I dare be sworn for him he would not leave it Nor pluck it from his finger for the wealth That the world masters .
Now in faith , Gratiano , You give your wife too unkind a cause of grief .
An 'twere to me , I should be mad at it .
My Lord Bassanio gave his ring away Unto the judge that begged it and indeed Deserved it too .
And then the boy , his clerk , That took some pains in writing , he begged mine .
And neither man nor master would take aught But the two rings .
What ring gave you my lord ?
Not that , I hope , which you received of me .
If I could add a lie unto a fault I would deny it .
but you see my finger Hath not the ring upon it .
It is gone .
Sweet Portia , If you did know to whom I gave the ring , If you did know for whom I gave the ring , And would conceive for what I gave the ring , And how unwillingly I left the ring When naught would be accepted but the ring , You would abate the strength of your displeasure .
If you had known the virtue of the ring , Or half her worthiness that gave the ring , Or your own honor to contain the ring , You would not then have parted with the ring .
Nerissa teaches me what to believe .
I'll die for 't but some woman had the ring .
What should I say , sweet lady ?
I was enforced to send it after him .
Let not that doctor e'er come near my house !
Since he hath got the jewel that I loved , And that which you did swear to keep for me , I will become as liberal as you .
I'll not deny him anything I have , No , not my body , nor my husband's bed .
Know him I shall , I am well sure of it .
Lie not a night from home .
Watch me like Argus .
If you do not , if I be left alone , Now , by mine honor , which is yet mine own , I'll have that doctor for my bedfellow .
I am th ' unhappy subject of these quarrels .
Sir , grieve not you .
Portia , forgive me this enforced wrong , And in the hearing of these many friends I swear to thee , even by thine own fair eyes Wherein I see myself , Mark you but that !
In both my eyes he doubly sees himself , In each eye , one .
Swear by your double self , And there's an oath of credit !
Nay , but hear me .
Pardon this fault , and by my soul I swear I never more will break an oath with thee .
I once did lend my body for his wealth , Which but for him that had your husband's ring Had quite miscarried .
By heaven , it is the same I gave the doctor !
I had it of him .
What , are we cuckolds ere we have deserved it ?
Speak not so grossly. , You are all amazed .
I am dumb .
Ay , but the clerk that never means to do it Unless he live until he be a man .
Sweet lady , you have given me life and living .
How like you the young German , the Duke of Saxony's nephew ?
Very vilely in the morning , when he is sober , and most vilely in the afternoon , when he is drunk .
When he is best he is a little worse than a man , and when he is worst he is little better than a beast .
I will do any thing , Nerissa , ere I'll be married to a sponge .
You need not fear , lady , the having any of these lords .
And I pray God grant them a fair departure .
Do you not remember , lady , in your father's time a Venetian , a scholar and a soldier , that came hither in company of the Marquess of Montferrat ?
How now , Lorenzo ?
My clerk hath some good comforts too for you .
Ay , and I'll give them him without a fee .
Fair ladies , you drop manna in the way Of starved people .
It is almost morning , And yet I am sure you are not satisfied Of these events at full .
Let us go in , And charge us there upon interr'gatories , And we will answer all things faithfully .
Let it be so .
The first interr'gatory That my Nerissa shall be sworn on is Whether till the next night she had rather stay , Or go to bed now , being two hours to day .
But were the day come , I should wish it dark , That I were couching with the doctor's clerk .
True , madam .
He , of all the men that ever my foolish eyes looked upon , was the best deserving a fair lady .
I remember him well , and I remember him worthy of thy praise .
How now , what news ?
The four strangers seek for you , madam , to take their leave .
And there is a forerunner come from a fifth , the Prince of Morocco , who brings word the prince his master will be here tonight .
If I could bid the fifth welcome with so good a heart as I can bid the other four farewell , I should be glad of his approach .
If he have the condition of a saint and the complexion of a devil , I had rather he should shrive me than wive me .
Come , Nerissa. ,
Three thousand ducats , well .
Ay , sir , for three months .
For three months , well .
For the which , as I told you , Antonio shall be bound .
Antonio shall become bound , well .
May you stead me ?
Will you pleasure me ?
Shall I know your answer ?
Three thousand ducats for three months , and Antonio bound .
Your answer to that ?
Antonio is a good man .
Have you heard any imputation to the contrary ?
Yet his means are in supposition .
He hath an argosy bound to Tripolis , another to the Indies .
I understand moreover , upon the Rialto , he hath a third at Mexico , a fourth for England , and other ventures he hath squandered abroad .
But ships are but boards , sailors but men .
There be land rats and water rats , water thieves and land thieves , I mean pirates , and then there is the peril of waters , winds , and rocks .
The man is notwithstanding sufficient .
Be assured you may .
This is Signor Antonio .
In sooth , I know not why I am so sad .
It wearies me ; you say it wearies you .
Believe me , sir , had I such venture forth , The better part of my affections would Be with my hopes abroad .
And every object that might make me fear Misfortune to my ventures out of doubt Would make me sad .
Shylock , do you hear ?
I am debating of my present store , And by the near guess of my memory I can not instantly raise up the gross Of full three thousand ducats .
What of that ?
Tubal , a wealthy Hebrew of my tribe , Will furnish me .
But soft !
How many months Do you desire ?
Shylock , albeit I neither lend nor borrow By taking nor by giving of excess , Yet to supply the ripe wants of my friend , I'll break a custom .
Ay , ay , three thousand ducats .
And for three months .
I had forgot , three months .
You told me so .
I do never use it .
When Jacob grazed his uncle Laban's sheep , This Jacob from our holy Abram was , As his wise mother wrought in his behalf , The third possessor , ay , he was the third , And what of him ?
Did he take interest ?
This was a venture , sir , that Jacob served for , A thing not in his power to bring to pass But swayed and fashioned by the hand of heaven .
Or is your gold and silver ewes and rams ?
But note me , signor ,
An evil soul producing holy witness Is like a villain with a smiling cheek , A goodly apple rotten at the heart .
Oh , what a goodly outside falsehood hath !
Three months from twelve , then .
Let me see .
The rate , Well , Shylock , shall we be beholding to you ?
Signor Antonio , many a time and oft In the Rialto you have rated me About my moneys and my usances .
You call me misbeliever , cutthroat dog , And spet upon my Jewish gaberdine , And all for use of that which is mine own .
Well then , it now appears you need my help .
Go to , then !
You come to me and you say , "Shylock , we would have moneys." You say so ! , You , that did void your rheum upon my beard And foot me as you spurn a stranger cur Over your threshold !
Moneys is your suit .
What should I say to you ?
Should I not say , "Hath a dog money ?
Is it possible A cur can lend three thousand ducats ? " Or Shall I bend low and in a bondman's key With bated breath and whispering humbleness Say this :
If thou wilt lend this money , lend it not As to thy friends , for when did friendship take A breed for barren metal of his friend ?
But lend it rather to thine enemy , Who , if he break , thou mayst with better face Exact the penalty .
Why , look you how you storm !
I would be friends with you and have your love , Forget the shames that you have stained me with , Supply your present wants and take no doit Of usance for my moneys , and you'll not hear me !
This is kind I offer .
This were kindness .
This kindness will I show .
Go with me to a notary , seal me there Your single bond , and , in a merry sport , If you repay me not on such a day , In such a place , such sum or sums as are Expressed in the condition , let the forfeit Be nominated for an equal pound Of your fair flesh , to be cut off and taken In what part of your body pleaseth me .
Content , in faith .
I'll seal to such a bond , And say there is much kindness in the Jew .
You shall not seal to such a bond for me !
I'll rather dwell in my necessity .
Within these two months , that's a month before This bond expires , I do expect return Of thrice three times the value of this bond .
A pound of man's flesh taken from a man Is not so estimable , profitable neither , As flesh of muttons , beefs , or goats .
If he will take it , so .
If not , adieu .
And for my love I pray you wrong me not .
Yes , Shylock , I will seal unto this bond .
Then meet me forthwith at the notary's .
Give him direction for this merry bond , And I will go and purse the ducats straight , See to my house left in the fearful guard Of an unthrifty knave , and presently I will be with you .
Hie thee , gentle Jew .
My ships come home a month before the day .
I would not change this hue Except to steal your thoughts , my gentle queen .
Even for that I thank you .
Therefore I pray you lead me to the caskets To try my fortune .
By this scimitar That slew the Sophy and a Persian prince That won three fields of Sultan Solyman , I would o'erstare the sternest eyes that look , Outbrave the heart most daring on the earth , Pluck the young sucking cubs from the she-bear , Yea , mock the lion when he roars for prey , To win the lady .
But , alas the while !
Nor will not .
Come , bring me unto my chance .
First , forward to the temple .
After dinner Your hazard shall be made .
Certainly my conscience will serve me to run from this Jew , my master .
For the heavens , rouse up a brave mind , " says the fiend , "and run." Well , my conscience , hanging about the neck of my heart , says very wisely to me , "My honest friend Launcelot , being an honest man's son" , or rather an honest woman's son , for indeed my father did something smack , something grow to .
He had a kind of taste. , Well , my conscience says , "Launcelot , budge not." "Budge ! " says the fiend .
Budge not , " says my conscience .
Conscience , " say I , "you counsel well." "Fiend , " say I , "you counsel well." To be ruled by my conscience I should stay with the Jew my master , who , God bless the mark , is a kind of devil .
And to run away from the Jew I should be ruled by the fiend , who , saving your reverence , is the devil himself .
The fiend gives the more friendly counsel .
I will run , fiend .
I will run .
Master young man , you , I pray you , which is the way to Master Jew's ?
Master young gentleman , I pray you , which is the way to Master Jew's ?
Turn up on your right hand at the next turning , but at the next turning of all on your left .
Marry , at the very next turning turn of no hand , but turn down indirectly to the Jew's house .
By God's sonties , 'twill be a hard way to hit .
Can you tell me whether one Launcelot that dwells with him , dwell with him or no ?
Talk you of young Master Launcelot ?
No "master , " sir , but a poor man's son .
His father , though I say 't , is an honest exceeding poor man and , God be thanked , well to live .
Your worship's friend and Launcelot , sir .
Shall I have the thought To think on this , and shall I lack the thought That such a thing bechanced would make me sad ?
But tell not me .
Believe me , no .
Therefore my merchandise makes me not sad .
Why then , you are in love .
Not in love neither ?
But I pray you , ergo , old man , ergo , I beseech you , talk you of young Master Launcelot ?
Ergo , Master Launcelot .
Marry , God forbid !
The boy was the very staff of my age , my very prop .
Do I look like a cudgel or a hovel-post , a staff or a prop ?
Do you know me , Father ?
Alack the day , I know you not , young gentleman .
But I pray you , tell me , is my boy , God rest his soul , alive or dead ?
Do you not know me , Father ?
Alack , sir , I am sand-blind .
I know you not .
Nay , indeed if you had your eyes , you might fail of the knowing me .
It is a wise father that knows his own child .
Well , old man , I will tell you news of your son .
Give me your blessing .
Pray you , sir , stand up .
I am sure you are not Launcelot , my boy .
Pray you , let's have no more fooling about it , but give me your blessing .
I am Launcelot , your boy that was , your son that is , your child that shall be .
I can not think you are my son .
Her name is Margery , indeed .
I'll be sworn , if thou be Launcelot , thou art mine own flesh and blood .
It should seem then that Dobbin's tail grows backward .
I am sure he had more hair of his tail than I have of my face when I last saw him .
Lord , how art thou changed !
How dost thou and thy master agree ?
I have brought him a present .
How 'gree you now ?
My master's a very Jew .
Give him a present .
Give him a halter .
I am famished in his service .
You may tell every finger I have with my ribs .
Father , I am glad you are come .
Give me your present to one Master Bassanio , who indeed gives rare new liveries .
Gramercy !
Wouldst thou aught with me ?
What would you ?
Serve you , sir .
That is the very defect of the matter , sir .
I know thee well .
Thou hast obtained thy suit .
Father , in .
My best endeavours shall be done herein .
Yonder , sir , he walks .
Signor Bassanio !
Gratiano !
I have a suit to you .
You have obtained it .
You must not deny me .
I must go with you to Belmont .
Why , then you must .
But hear thee , Gratiano .
Thou art too wild , too rude and bold of voice , Parts that become thee happily enough And in such eyes as ours appear not faults .
Pray thee , take pain To allay with some cold drops of modesty Thy skipping spirit , lest through thy wild behavior I be misconst'red in the place I go to , And lose my hopes .
Signor Bassanio , hear me .
If I do not put on a sober habit , Talk with respect and swear but now and then , Wear prayer books in my pocket , look demurely , Nay more .
While grace is saying , hood mine eyes Thus with my hat , and sigh and say , "Amen" , Use all the observance of civility Like one well studied in a sad ostent To please his grandam , never trust me more .
Well , we shall see your bearing .
Nay , but I bar tonight .
You shall not gauge me By what we do tonight .
I would entreat you rather to put on Your boldest suit of mirth , for we have friends That purpose merriment .
But fare you well .
I have some business .
I am sorry thou wilt leave my father so .
Our house is hell , and thou , a merry devil , Didst rob it of some taste of tediousness .
And Launcelot , soon at supper shalt thou see Lorenzo , who is thy new master's guest .
Give him this letter .
Adieu !
If a Christian do not play the knave and get thee , I am much deceived .
But adieu .
These foolish drops do something drown my manly spirit .
Adieu .
Farewell , good Launcelot .
Alack , what heinous sin is it in me To be ashamed to be my father's child !
But though I am a daughter to his blood , I am not to his manners .
O Lorenzo , If thou keep promise , I shall end this strife , Become a Christian and thy loving wife .
Nay , we will slink away in supper time , Disguise us at my lodging , and return , All in an hour .
We have not made good preparation .
We have not spoke us yet of torchbearers .
Tis vile , unless it may be quaintly ordered , And better in my mind not undertook .
Tis now but four o'clock .
We have two hours To furnish us .
Friend Launcelot , what's the news ?
I know the hand .
Love news , in faith ?
Whither goest thou ?
Marry , sir , to bid my old master the Jew to sup tonight with my new master the Christian .
And so will I .
Meet me and Gratiano At Gratiano's lodging some hour hence .
Tis good we do so .
Was not that letter from fair Jessica ?
Some that will evermore peep through their eyes And laugh like parrots at a bagpiper , And other of such vinegar aspect That they'll not show their teeth in way of smile Though Nestor swear the jest be laughable .
Fare ye well .
Your worth is very dear in my regard .
I take it your own business calls on you And you embrace th ' occasion to depart .
Good signors both , when shall we laugh ?
My Lord Bassanio , since you have found Antonio , We two will leave you .
I will not fail you .
I must needs tell thee all .
Who bids thee call ?
I do not bid thee call .
Your worship was wont to tell me that I could do nothing without bidding .
Call you ?
What is your will ?
I am bid forth to supper , Jessica .
There are my keys. , But wherefore should I go ?
I am not bid for love .
They flatter me .
But yet I'll go in hate to feed upon The prodigal Christian. , Jessica , my girl , Look to my house .
I am right loath to go .
There is some ill a-brewing towards my rest , For I did dream of money bags tonight .
I beseech you , sir , go .
My young master doth expect your reproach .
So do I his .
And they have conspired together .
I will not say you shall see a masque , but if you do then it was not for nothing that my nose fell a-bleeding on Black Monday last at six o'clock i ' th ' morning falling out that year on Ash Wednesday was four year in th ' afternoon .
What , are there masques ?
But stop my house's ears , I mean my casements , Let not the sound of shallow foppery enter My sober house .
By Jacob's staff , I swear , I have no mind of feasting forth tonight .
I will go before , sir. , Mistress , look out at window , for all this .
What says that fool of Hagar's offspring , ha ?
His words were , "Farewell , mistress." Nothing else .
The patch is kind enough , but a huge feeder , Snail-slow in profit , and he sleeps by day More than the wildcat .
Drones hive not with me .
Well , Jessica , go in .
Perhaps I will return immediately .
Do as I bid you .
Shut doors after you .
Fast bind , fast find .
Farewell , and if my fortune be not crost , I have a father , you a daughter , lost .
This is the penthouse under which Lorenzo Desired us to make stand .
His hour is almost past .
And it is marvel he outdwells his hour , For lovers ever run before the clock .
Oh , ten times faster Venus ' pigeons fly To seal love's bonds new made than they are wont To keep obliged faith unforfeited .
That ever holds .
Who riseth from a feast With that keen appetite that he sits down ?
Where is the horse that doth untread again His tedious measures with the unbated fire That he did pace them first ?
All things that are , Are with more spirit chased than enjoyed .
Here comes Lorenzo .
More of this hereafter .
Sweet friends , your patience for my long abode .
Not I but my affairs have made you wait .
When you shall please to play the thieves for wives , I'll watch as long for you then .
Approach .
Who's within ?
Who are you ?
Tell me for more certainty , Albeit I'll swear that I do know your tongue .
Lorenzo , and thy love .
Lorenzo certain , and my love indeed , For who love I so much ?
And now who knows But you , Lorenzo , whether I am yours ?
Heaven and thy thoughts are witness that thou art .
Here , catch this casket .
It is worth the pains .
Descend , for you must be my torchbearer .
What , must I hold a candle to my shames ?
I will make fast the doors and gild myself With some more ducats , and be with you straight .
Now , by my hood , a gentle and no Jew .
Beshrew me but I love her heartily .
For she is wise , if I can judge of her .
And fair she is , if that mine eyes be true .
And true she is , as she hath proved herself .
And therefore , like herself , wise , fair and true , Shall she be placed in my constant soul .
What , art thou come ? , On , gentlemen , away !
Our masquing mates by this time for us stay .
Who's there ?
Signor Antonio ?
Tis nine o'clock .
Our friends all stay for you .
No masque tonight .
I have sent twenty out to seek for you .
I am glad on 't .
I desire no more delight Than to be under sail and gone tonight .
The one of them contains my picture , Prince .
If you choose that , then I am yours withal .
Some god direct my judgment !
Let me see .
I will survey th ' inscriptions back again .
What says this leaden casket ?
Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath." Must give , for what ?
For lead ?
Hazard for lead ?
This casket threatens .
Men that hazard all Do it in hope of fair advantages .
A golden mind stoops not to shows of dross .
I'll then nor give nor hazard aught for lead .
What says the silver with her virgin hue ?
Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves." "As much as he deserves ! " , pause there , Morocco , And weigh thy value with an even hand .
What if I strayed no further , but chose here ?
Let's see once more this saying graved in gold , "Who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire." Why , that's the lady .
All the world desires her .
From the four corners of the earth they come To kiss this shrine , this mortal breathing saint .
The Hyrcanian deserts and the vasty wilds Of wide Arabia are as thoroughfares now For princes to come view fair Portia .
The watery kingdom , whose ambitious head Spits in the face of heaven , is no bar To stop the foreign spirits , but they come As o'er a brook to see fair Portia .
One of these three contains her heavenly picture .
Is 't like that lead contains her ?
Twere damnation To think so base a thought .
It were too gross To rib her cerecloth in the obscure grave .
Or shall I think in silver she's immured , Being ten times undervalued to tried gold ?
O sinful thought !
Never so rich a gem Was set in worse than gold .
They have in England A coin that bears the figure of an angel Stamped in gold , but that's insculped upon .
You look not well , Signor Antonio .
You have too much respect upon the world .
And let my liver rather heat with wine Than my heart cool with mortifying groans .
I'll tell thee more of this another time .
But fish not with this melancholy bait For this fool gudgeon , this opinion. , Come , good Lorenzo. , Fare ye well awhile .
I'll end my exhortation after dinner .
Lies all within. , Deliver me the key .
Here do I choose , and thrive I as I may !
There , take it , Prince .
O hell , what have we here ?
A carrion death , within whose empty eye There is a written scroll .
I'll read the writing .
All that glisters is not gold , Often have you heard that told .
Many a man his life hath sold But my outside to behold .
Gilded tombs do worms enfold .
Had you been as wise as bold , Young in limbs , in judgment old , Your answer had not been inscrolled .
Portia , adieu .
I have too grieved a heart To take a tedious leave .
Thus losers part .
A gentle riddance. , Draw the curtains , go. , Let all of his complexion choose me so .
Why , man , I saw Bassanio under sail .
With him is Gratiano gone along .
And in their ship I am sure Lorenzo is not .
The villain Jew with outcries raised the Duke , Who went with him to search Bassanio's ship .
He came too late .
The ship was under sail .
But there the Duke was given to understand That in a gondola were seen together Lorenzo and his amorous Jessica .
Besides , Antonio certified the Duke They were not with Bassanio in his ship .
I never heard a passion so confused , So strange , outrageous , and so variable , As the dog Jew did utter in the streets .
O my daughter , Fled with a Christian !
O my Christian ducats !
Justice , find the girl !
She hath the stones upon her , and the ducats." Why , all the boys in Venice follow him , Crying , "His stones , his daughter , and his ducats ! "
Let good Antonio look he keep his day , Or he shall pay for this .
Marry , well remembered .
I reasoned with a Frenchman yesterday , Who told me , in the narrow seas that part The French and English , there miscarried A vessel of our country richly fraught .
You were best to tell Antonio what you hear , Yet do not suddenly , for it may grieve him .
I saw Bassanio and Antonio part .
Bassanio told him he would make some speed Of his return .
And for the Jew's bond which he hath of me , Let it not enter in your mind of love .
And so they parted .
I think he only loves the world for him .
I pray thee , let us go and find him out And quicken his embraced heaviness With some delight or other .
Do we so .
Draw the curtain straight .
The Prince of Arragon hath ta'en his oath And comes to his election presently .
Behold , there stand the caskets , noble Prince .
If you choose that wherein I am contained , Straight shall our nuptial rites be solemnized .
But if you fail , without more speech , my lord , You must be gone from hence immediately .
To these injunctions every one doth swear That comes to hazard for my worthless self .
And so have I addressed me .
Fortune now To my heart's hope !
Gold , silver , and base lead .
Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath." You shall look fairer ere I give or hazard .
What says the golden chest ?
Ha , let me see .
So , with two seeming bodies but one heart , Two of the first , like coats in heraldry , Due but to one and crowned with one crest .
And will you rent our ancient love asunder To join with men in scorning your poor friend ?
It is not friendly , 'tis not maidenly .
Our sex , as well as I , may chide you for it , Though I alone do feel the injury .
I scorn you not .
It seems that you scorn me .
Have you not set Lysander , as in scorn , To follow me and praise my eyes and face ?
And made your other love , Demetrius , Who even but now did spurn me with his foot , To call me goddess , nymph , divine , and rare , Precious , celestial ?
Wherefore speaks he this To her he hates ?
And wherefore doth Lysander Deny your love , so rich within his soul , And tender me , forsooth , affection , But by your setting on , by your consent ?
What though I be not so in grace as you , So hung upon with love , so fortunate , But miserable most , to love unloved ?
This you should pity rather than despise .
I understand not what you mean by this .
Ay , do .
Persever , counterfeit sad looks , Make mouths upon me when I turn my back , Wink each at other , hold the sweet jest up , This sport , well carried , shall be chronicled .
If you have any pity , grace , or manners , You would not make me such an argument .
But fare ye well .
Tis partly my own fault , Which death or absence soon shall remedy .
Stay , gentle Helena .
Hear my excuse .
My love , my life , my soul , fair Helena !
Oh , excellent !
Thou canst compel no more than she entreat .
Thy threats have no more strength than her weak prayers. , Helen , I love thee .
By my life , I do .
I swear by that which I will lose for thee To prove him false that says I love thee not .
I say I love thee more than he can do .
If thou say so , withdraw and prove it too .
Lysander , whereto tends all this ?
Why are you grown so rude ?
Thy love ?
Out , tawny Tartar , out !
Out , loathed medicine !
O hated potion , hence !
Do you not jest ?
Yes , sooth , and so do you .
Demetrius , I will keep my word with thee .
I would I had your bond , for I perceive A weak bond holds you .
I'll not trust your word .
Although I hate her , I'll not harm her so .
Ay , by my life , And never did desire to see thee more .
Therefore be out of hope , of question , of doubt .
Be certain , nothing truer .
O me !
Fine , i ' faith !
Have you no modesty , no maiden shame , No touch of bashfulness ?
Puppet" ?
Why so ? , Ay , that way goes the game .
How low am I , thou painted maypole ?
Speak .
How low am I ?
Good Hermia , do not be so bitter with me .
He followed you .
For love I followed him .
But he hath chid me hence and threatened me To strike me , spurn me , nay , to kill me too .
Let me go .
You see how simple and how fond I am .
Why , get you gone !
Who is 't that hinders you ?
A foolish heart , that I leave here behind .
What , with Lysander ?
With Demetrius .
Be not afraid .
She shall not harm thee , Helena .
She was a vixen when she went to school .
And though she be but little , she is fierce .
Little" again ?
Nothing but "low" and "little" ! , Why will you suffer her to flout me thus ?
Let me come to her .
What cheer , my love ? , Demetrius and Egeus , go along .
I must employ you in some business Against our nuptial and confer with you Of something nearly that concerns yourselves .
With duty and desire we follow you .
How now , my love ?
Why is your cheek so pale ?
How chance the roses there do fade so fast ?
Belike for want of rain , which I could well Beteem them from the tempest of my eyes .
Ay me !
For aught that I could ever read , Could ever hear by tale or history , The course of true love never did run smooth .
But either it was different in blood ,
Let her alone .
Speak not of Helena .
Take not her part .
For if thou dost intend Never so little show of love to her , Thou shalt aby it .
Now she holds me not .
Now follow , if thou darest , to try whose right , Of thine or mine , is most in Helena .
Follow" ?
Nay , I'll go with thee , cheek by jowl .
You , mistress , all this coil is long of you .
Nay , go not back .
I am amazed and know not what to say .
Believe me , King of Shadows , I mistook .
Did not you tell me I should know the man By the Athenian garment he had on ?
And so far blameless proves my enterprise , That I have 'nointed an Athenian's eyes .
And so far am I glad it so did sort , As this their jangling I esteem a sport .
Thou seest these lovers seek a place to fight .
Hie therefore , Robin , overcast the night .
The starry welkin cover thou anon With drooping fog as black as Acheron , And lead these testy rivals so astray As one come not within another's way .
My fairy lord , this must be done with haste .
But we are spirits of another sort .
I with the morning's love have oft made sport , And like a forester the groves may tread Even till the eastern gate , all fiery red , Opening on Neptune with fair blessed beams , Turns into yellow gold his salt green streams .
But notwithstanding , haste .
Make no delay .
We may effect this business yet ere day .
Up and down , up and down , I will lead them up and down .
I am feared in field and town .
Goblin , lead them up and down .
Here comes one .
Where art thou , proud Demetrius ?
Speak thou now .
Lysander , speak again !
Thou runaway , thou coward , art thou fled ?
Speak !
In some bush ?
Where dost thou hide thy head ?
Yea , art thou there ?
He goes before me and still dares me on .
When I come where he calls , then he is gone .
The villain is much lighter-heeled than I. I followed fast , but faster he did fly , That fallen am I in dark uneven way ,
And here will rest me .
Where art thou now ?
Nay , then , thou mock'st me .
Thou shalt buy this dear If ever I thy face by daylight see .
Now go thy way .
O weary night , O long and tedious night , Abate thy hours .
Yet but three ?
Come one more .
Two of both kinds make up four .
Here she comes , cursed and sad .
Cupid is a knavish lad Thus to make poor females mad .
Here will I rest me till the break of day .
Heavens shield Lysander if they mean a fray !
On the ground Sleep sound .
Where's Peaseblossom ?
Ready .
Scratch my head , Peaseblossom .
Where's Monsieur Cobweb ?
Ready .
Do not fret yourself too much in the action , monsieur .
And good monsieur , have a care the honey bag break not .
I would be loath to have you overflown with a honey bag , signor .
Where's Monsieur Mustardseed ?
Ready .
Give me your neaf , Monsieur Mustardseed .
Pray you , leave your courtesy , good monsieur .
What's your will ?
Nothing , good monsieur , but to help Cavalery Cobweb to scratch .
I must to the barber's , monsieur , for methinks I am marvelous hairy about the face .
And I am such a tender ass , if my hair do but tickle me , I must scratch .
What , wilt thou hear some music , my sweet love ?
I have a reasonable good ear in music .
Let's have the tongs and the bones .
Or say , sweet love , what thou desirest to eat .
Truly , a peck of provender .
I could munch your good dry oats .
Methinks I have a great desire to a bottle of hay .
Good hay , sweet hay , hath no fellow .
I have a venturous fairy that shall seek The squirrel's hoard and fetch thee new nuts .
I had rather have a handful or two of dried peas .
But , I pray you , let none of your people stir me .
I have an exposition of sleep come upon me .
Sleep thou , and I will wind thee in my arms .
Oh , how I love thee !
How I dote on thee !
Welcome , good Robin .
Seest thou this sweet sight ?
Her dotage now I do begin to pity .
For , meeting her of late behind the wood , Seeking sweet favors from this hateful fool , I did upbraid her and fall out with her .
For she his hairy temples then had rounded With a coronet of fresh and fragrant flowers , And that same dew , which sometime on the buds Was wont to swell like round and orient pearls , Stood now within the pretty flowerets ' eyes Like tears that did their own disgrace bewail .
And now I have the boy , I will undo This hateful imperfection of her eyes .
And , gentle Puck , take this transformed scalp From off the head of this Athenian swain , That , he awaking when the other do , May all to Athens back again repair And think no more of this night's accidents But as the fierce vexation of a dream .
But first I will release the fairy queen .
Now , my Titania , wake you , my sweet queen .
There lies your love .
How came these things to pass ?
Oh , how mine eyes do loathe his visage now !
Silence awhile. , Robin , take off this head. , Titania , music call , and strike more dead Than common sleep of all these five the sense .
Music , ho !
Music such as charmeth sleep !
Sound , music ! , Come , my queen , take hands with me , And rock the ground whereon these sleepers be .
Too old to be engaged to young .
Or else it stood upon the choice of friends , O hell , to choose love by another's eyes !
So quick bright things come to confusion .
If then true lovers have been ever crossed , It stands as an edict in destiny .
A good persuasion .
Therefore , hear me , Hermia .
I have a widow aunt , a dowager Of great revenue , and she hath no child .
From Athens is her house remote seven leagues , And she respects me as her only son .
There , gentle Hermia , may I marry thee .
And to that place the sharp Athenian law Can not pursue us .
Fairy King , attend , and mark .
I do hear the morning lark .
Then , my queen , in silence sad , Trip we after the night's shade .
Come , my lord , and in our flight Tell me how it came this night That I sleeping here was found With these mortals on the ground .
Go , one of you , find out the forester .
Uncouple in the western valley .
Let them go .
Dispatch , I say , and find the forester .
We will , fair queen , up to the mountain's top , And mark the musical confusion Of hounds and echo in conjunction .
I was with Hercules and Cadmus once , When in a wood of Crete they bayed the bear With hounds of Sparta .
The skies , the fountains , every region near Seemed all one mutual cry .
I never heard So musical a discord , such sweet thunder .
I wonder of their being here together .
But speak , Egeus .
Is not this the day That Hermia should give answer of her choice ?
It is , my lord .
Go , bid the huntsmen wake them with their horns .
Good morrow , friends .
Saint Valentine is past .
Begin these woodbirds but to couple now ?
Pardon , my lord .
I pray you all , stand up .
My lord , I shall reply amazedly , Half sleep , half waking .
But as yet , I swear , I can not truly say how I came here .
But as I think , for truly would I speak , And now do I bethink me , so it is , I came with Hermia hither .
And all the faith , the virtue of my heart , The object and the pleasure of mine eye , Is only Helena .
To her , my lord , Was I betrothed ere I saw Hermia .
Fair lovers , you are fortunately met .
Of this discourse we more will hear anon. , Egeus , I will overbear your will .
Away with us to Athens .
Three and three , We'll hold a feast in great solemnity .
Are you sure That we are awake ?
It seems to me That yet we sleep , we dream .
And he did bid us follow to the temple .
Why then , we are awake .
It shall be called "Bottom's Dream" because it hath no bottom .
And I will sing it in the latter end of a play before the duke .
Peradventure , to make it the more gracious , I shall sing it at her death .
Have you sent to Bottom's house ?
Is he come home yet ?
He can not be heard of .
Out of doubt he is transported .
If he come not , then the play is marred .
It goes not forward .
Doth it ?
It is not possible .
No , he hath simply the best wit of any handicraft man in Athens .
Yea , and the best person too .
And he is a very paramour for a sweet voice .
You must say "paragon." A "paramour" is , God bless us , a thing of naught .
Masters , the duke is coming from the temple , and there is two or three lords and ladies more married .
If our sport had gone forward , we had all been made men .
O sweet bully Bottom !
Thus hath he lost sixpence a day during his life .
He could not have 'scaped sixpence a day .
An the duke had not given him sixpence a day for playing Pyramus , I'll be hanged .
He would have deserved it .
Where are these hearts ?
Bottom !
O most courageous day !
O most happy hour !
I will tell you everything , right as it fell out .
Let us hear , sweet Bottom .
Not a word of me .
All that I will tell you is that the duke hath dined .
Get your apparel together , good strings to your beards , new ribbons to your pumps .
Meet presently at the palace .
Every man look o'er his part .
And most dear actors , eat no onions nor garlic , for we are to utter sweet breath .
And I do not doubt but to hear them say , "It is a sweet comedy." No more words .
Away , go away !
Tis strange , my Theseus , that these lovers speak of .
I never may believe These antique fables nor these fairy toys .
The lunatic , the lover , and the poet Are of imagination all compact .
But all the story of the night told over , And all their minds transfigured so together , More witnesseth than fancy's images And grows to something of great constancy , But , howsoever , strange and admirable .
Here come the lovers , full of joy and mirth. , Joy , gentle friends !
Come now , what masques , what dances shall we have To wear away this long age of three hours Between our after-supper and bedtime ?
Where is our usual manager of mirth ?
What revels are in hand ?
Call Philostrate .
Here , mighty Theseus .
What masque , what music ?
How shall we beguile The lazy time if not with some delight ?
Keep promise , love .
Look , here comes Helena .
Godspeed , fair Helena !
Whither away ?
Call you me "fair" ?
That "fair" again unsay .
Demetrius loves your fair .
O happy fair !
Your eyes are lodestars , and your tongue's sweet air More tunable than lark to shepherd's ear When wheat is green , when hawthorn buds appear .
Were the world mine , Demetrius being bated , The rest I'd give to be to you translated .
The thrice three Muses mourning for the death Of learning , late deceased in beggary." That is some satire , keen and critical , Not sorting with a nuptial ceremony .
Tedious" and "brief" ?
That is hot ice and wondrous strange snow .
How shall we find the concord of this discord ?
A play there is , my lord , some ten words long , Which is as brief as I have known a play .
For in all the play There is not one word apt , one player fitted .
For Pyramus therein doth kill himself .
Which , when I saw rehearsed , I must confess , Made mine eyes water , but more merry tears The passion of loud laughter never shed .
What are they that do play it ?
And we will hear it .
No , my noble lord .
It is not for you .
I have heard it over , And it is nothing , nothing in the world , Unless you can find sport in their intents , Extremely stretched and conned with cru 'l pain To do you service .
I will hear that play .
Go , bring them in. , And take your places , ladies .
Why , gentle sweet , you shall see no such thing .
He says they can do nothing in this kind .
Where I have come , great clerks have purposed To greet me with premeditated welcomes , Where I have seen them shiver and look pale , Make periods in the midst of sentences , Throttle their practiced accent in their fears , And in conclusion dumbly have broke off , Not paying me a welcome .
Love , therefore , and tongue-tied simplicity In least speak most , to my capacity .
So please your grace , the Prologue is addressed .
Let him approach .
If we offend , it is with our good will .
That you should think we come not to offend , But with good will .
Consider then we come but in despite .
We do not come as minding to contest you , Our true intent is .
All for your delight We are not here .
That you should here repent you , The actors are at hand , and by their show You shall know all that you are like to know .
This fellow doth not stand upon points .
He hath rid his prologue like a rough colt .
He knows not the stop .
A good moral , my lord : it is not enough to speak , but to speak true .
His speech was like a tangled chain .
Who is next ?
I wonder if the lion be to speak .
No wonder , my lord .
Would you desire lime and hair to speak better ?
It is the wittiest partition that ever I heard discourse , my lord .
Pyramus draws near the wall .
Silence !
I fear my Thisbe's promise is forgot ! , And thou , O Wall , O sweet , O lovely Wall , That stand'st between her father's ground and mine .
Jove shield thee well for this !
But what see I ?
No Thisbe do I see .
O wicked Wall through whom I see no bliss !
Cursed be thy stones for thus deceiving me !
The wall , methinks , being sensible , should curse again .
I see a voice .
Now will I to the chink , To spy an I can hear my Thisbe's face .
Thisbe ?
My love thou art , my love , I think .
Think what thou wilt , I am thy lover's grace .
Wilt thou at Ninny's tomb meet me straightway ?
Tide life , tide death , I come without delay .
Thus have I , Wall , my part discharged so .
And , being done , thus Wall away doth go .
This is the silliest stuff that ever I heard .
The best in this kind are but shadows , and the worst are no worse if imagination amend them .
It must be your imagination then , and not theirs .
Here come two noble beasts in , a man and a lion .
A very gentle beast , of a good conscience .
This lion is a very fox , for his valor .
True .
And a goose for his discretion .
Not so , my lord .
For his valor can not carry his discretion , and the fox carries the goose .
His discretion , I am sure , can not carry his valor , for the goose carries not the fox .
It is well .
Leave it to his discretion , and let us listen to the moon .
This lanthorn doth the horned moon present .
Myself the man i ' th ' moon do seem to be , This is the greatest error of all the rest .
The man should be put into the lanthorn .
How is it else the "man i ' th ' moon" ?
He dares not come there for the candle .
For you see , it is already in snuff .
I am aweary of this moon .
Proceed , Moon .
All that I have to say is to tell you that the lanthorn is the moon ; I , the man in the moon ; this thornbush , my thornbush ; and this dog , my dog .
Why , all these should be in the lanthorn , for all these are in the moon. , But silence !
Here comes Thisbe .
This is old Ninny's tomb .
Where is my love ?
Well roared , Lion !
Well run , Thisbe !
Well shone , Moon ! , Truly , the moon shines with a good grace .
Well moused , Lion !
O , teach me how you look and with what art You sway the motion of Demetrius ' heart .
I frown upon him , yet he loves me still .
Oh , that your frowns would teach my smiles such skill !
I give him curses , yet he gives me love .
Oh , that my prayers could such affection move !
The more I hate , the more he follows me .
The more I love , the more he hateth me .
His folly , Helena , is no fault of mine .
None , but your beauty .
Would that fault were mine !
Take comfort .
He no more shall see my face .
Lysander and myself will fly this place .
Before the time I did Lysander see Seemed Athens as a paradise to me .
Oh , then , what graces in my love do dwell , That he hath turned a heaven unto a hell !
Helen , to you our minds we will unfold .
Tomorrow night when Phoebe doth behold Her silver visage in the watery glass , Decking with liquid pearl the bladed grass ( A time that lovers ' flights doth still conceal ) , Through Athens ' gates have we devised to steal .
And then came Pyramus .
And so the lion vanished .
Sweet Moon , I thank thee for thy sunny beams .
But mark , poor knight , What dreadful dole is here !
Eyes , do you see ?
How can it be ?
O dainty duck !
O dear !
O Fates , come , come , Cut thread and thrum .
Quail , crush , conclude , and quell !
O wherefore , Nature , didst thou lions frame ?
Thus die I , thus , thus , thus .
Now am I dead .
Now die , die , die , die , die .
With the help of a surgeon he might yet recover and prove an ass .
Methinks she should not use a long one for such a Pyramus .
I hope she will be brief .
She hath spied him already with those sweet eyes .
And thus she means , videlicet , Asleep , my love ?
What , dead , my dove ?
O Pyramus , arise !
Speak , speak .
Quite dumb ?
Dead , dead ?
A tomb Must cover thy sweet eyes .
These lily lips , This cherry nose , These yellow cowslip cheeks Are gone , are gone .
Lovers , make moan .
His eyes were green as leeks .
O Sisters three , Come , come to me With hands as pale as milk .
Lay them in gore , Since you have shore With shears his thread of silk .
Tongue , not a word .
Come , trusty sword .
Come , blade , my breast imbrue .
Moonshine and Lion are left to bury the dead .
Ay , and Wall too .
No epilogue , I pray you , for your play needs no excuse .
Never excuse , for when the players are all dead , there needs none to be blamed .
Marry , if he that writ it had played Pyramus and hanged himself in Thisbe's garter , it would have been a fine tragedy .
And so it is , truly , and very notably discharged .
But come , your Bergomask .
Let your epilogue alone .
The iron tongue of midnight hath told twelve .
Lovers , to bed .
Tis almost fairy time .
Sweet friends , to bed .
Through the house give glimmering light , By the dead and drowsy fire .
First , rehearse your song by rote , To each word a warbling note .
Hand in hand with fairy grace Will we sing and bless this place .
If you pardon , we will mend .
And , as I am an honest Puck , If we have unearned luck Now to 'scape the serpent's tongue , We will make amends ere long .
Else the Puck a liar call .
So good night unto you all .
Give me your hands if we be friends , And Robin shall restore amends .
There my Lysander and myself shall meet .
And thence from Athens turn away our eyes To seek new friends and stranger companies .
Farewell , sweet playfellow .
We must starve our sight From lovers ' food till morrow deep midnight .
I will , my Hermia .
Helena , adieu .
As you on him , Demetrius dote on you !
But what of that ?
Demetrius thinks not so .
He will not know what all but he do know .
Things base and vile , holding no quantity , Love can transpose to form and dignity .
Love looks not with the eyes but with the mind .
And therefore is winged Cupid painted blind .
Nor hath Love's mind of any judgment taste , Wings and no eyes figure unheedy haste .
And therefore is Love said to be a child , Because in choice he is so oft beguiled .
Then to the wood will he tomorrow night Pursue her .
Is all our company here ?
First , good Peter Quince , say what the play treats on , then read the names of the actors , and so grow to a point .
Answer as I call you. , Nick Bottom , the weaver ?
Ready .
Name what part I am for and proceed .
You , Nick Bottom , are set down for Pyramus .
What is Pyramus ?
I will condole in some measure. , To the rest. , Yet my chief humor is for a tyrant .
I could play Ercles rarely , or a part to tear a cat in to make all split .
A lover is more condoling .
Francis Flute , the bellows-mender ?
Here , Peter Quince .
What is Thisbe ?
A wandering knight ?
It is the lady that Pyramus must love .
Nay , faith , let me not play a woman .
I have a beard coming .
That's all one .
You shall play it in a mask , and you may speak as small as you will .
An I may hide my face , let me play Thisbe too !
You must play Pyramus. , And Flute , you Thisbe .
Robin Starveling , the tailor ?
Here , Peter Quince .
Robin Starveling , you must play Thisbe's mother. , Tom Snout , the tinker ?
Here , Peter Quince .
You , Pyramus ' father. , Myself , Thisbe's father. , Snug the joiner , you , the lion's part. , And I hope here is a play fitted .
Have you the lion's part written ?
Pray you , if it be , give it me , for I am slow of study .
Let me play the lion too .
And that were enough to hang us all .
That would hang us , every mother's son .
I grant you , friends , if you should fright the ladies out of their wits , they would have no more discretion but to hang us .
For Pyramus is a sweet-faced man , a proper man as one shall see in a summer's day , a most lovely , gentlemanlike man .
Therefore you must needs play Pyramus .
Well , I will undertake it .
What beard were I best to play it in ?
Why , what you will .
Four days will quickly steep themselves in night .
Four nights will quickly dream away the time .
And then the moon , like to a silver bow New bent in heaven , shall behold the night Of our solemnities .
Turn melancholy forth to funerals .
The pale companion is not for our pomp .
But I will wed thee in another key , With pomp , with triumph , and with reveling .
Happy be Theseus , our renowned duke .
I will discharge it in either your straw-color beard , your orange-tawny beard , your purple-in-grain beard , or your French crown-color beard , your perfect yellow .
There will we rehearse , for if we meet in the city we shall be dogged with company , and our devices known .
In the meantime I will draw a bill of properties such as our play wants .
I pray you , fail me not .
We will meet , and there we may rehearse most obscenely and courageously .
Adieu .
At the duke's oak we meet .
Enough .
Hold , or cut bowstrings .
How now , spirit ?
Whither wander you ?
Over hill , over dale , Thorough bush , thorough brier , Over park , over pale , Thorough flood , thorough fire .
I do wander everywhere Swifter than the moon's sphere .
And I serve the fairy queen To dew her orbs upon the green .
The cowslips tall her pensioners be .
In those freckles live their savors .
I must go seek some dewdrops here And hang a pearl in every cowslip's ear .
Farewell , thou lob of spirits .
I'll be gone .
Our queen and all our elves come here anon .
For Oberon is passing fell and wrath Because that she , as her attendant hath A lovely boy stolen from an Indian king .
And jealous Oberon would have the child Knight of his train , to trace the forests wild .
But she perforce withholds the loved boy , Crowns him with flowers , and makes him all her joy .
Those that "Hobgoblin" call you , and "sweet Puck , " You do their work , and they shall have good luck .
Are not you he ?
Thou speak'st aright .
I am that merry wanderer of the night .
And sometime lurk I in a gossip's bowl In very likeness of a roasted crab , And when she drinks , against her lips I bob And on her withered dewlap pour the ale .
Then slip I from her bum , down topples she , And "Tailor ! " cries , and falls into a cough , And then the whole quire hold their hips and laugh , And waxen in their mirth , and neeze , and swear A merrier hour was never wasted there .
But , room , fairy !
Here comes Oberon .
And here my mistress .
Would that he were gone !
What , jealous Oberon ? , Fairies , skip hence .
I have forsworn his bed and company .
Tarry , rash wanton .
Why art thou here , Come from the farthest step of India ?
But that , forsooth , the bouncing Amazon , Your buskined mistress and your warrior love , To Theseus must be wedded , and you come To give their bed joy and prosperity .
How canst thou thus for shame , Titania , Knowing I know thy love to Theseus ?
Glance at my credit with Hippolyta , Didst thou not lead him through the glimmering night From Perigouna , whom he ravished ?
And make him with fair aegles break his faith , With Ariadne and Antiopa ?
These are the forgeries of jealousy .
And never , since the middle summer's spring , Met we on hill , in dale , forest , or mead , By paved fountain , or by rushy brook , Or in the beached margent of the sea , To dance our ringlets to the whistling wind , But with thy brawls thou hast disturbed our sport .
Therefore the winds , piping to us in vain , As in revenge , have sucked up from the sea Contagious fogs , which falling in the land Have every pelting river made so proud That they have overborne their continents .
The ox hath therefore stretched his yoke in vain , The ploughman lost his sweat , and the green corn Hath rotted ere his youth attained a beard .
The fold stands empty in the drowned field , And crows are fatted with the murrain flock .
Therefore the moon , the governess of floods , Pale in her anger , washes all the air , That rheumatic diseases do abound .
The spring , the summer , The childing autumn , angry winter change Their wonted liveries , and the mazed world , By their increase , now knows not which is which .
And this same progeny of evils comes From our debate , from our dissension .
We are their parents and original .
Do you amend it then .
It lies in you .
Why should Titania cross her Oberon ?
I do but beg a little changeling boy , To be my henchman .
Set your heart at rest .
The Fairyland buys not the child of me .
How long within this wood intend you stay ?
Perchance till after Theseus ' wedding day .
If you will patiently dance in our round And see our moonlight revels , go with us .
If not , shun me , and I will spare your haunts .
Give me that boy and I will go with thee .
Not for thy fairy kingdom. , Fairies , away !
We shall chide downright , if I longer stay .
Well , go thy way .
Thou shalt not from this grove Till I torment thee for this injury. , My gentle Puck , come hither .
I remember .
That very time I saw ( but thou couldst not ) Flying between the cold moon and the Earth , Cupid all armed .
A certain aim he took At a fair vestal throned by the west , And loosed his love shaft smartly from his bow As it should pierce a hundred thousand hearts .
But I might see young Cupid's fiery shaft Quenched in the chaste beams of the watery moon , And the imperial votaress passed on , In maiden meditation , fancy-free .
Yet marked I where the bolt of Cupid fell .
It fell upon a little western flower , Before milk-white , now purple with love's wound .
And maidens call it "love-in-idleness." Fetch me that flower .
The herb I showed thee once .
The juice of it on sleeping eyelids laid Will make or man or woman madly dote Upon the next live creature that it sees .
Fetch me this herb , and be thou here again Ere the leviathan can swim a league .
I'll put a girdle round about the Earth In forty minutes .
Having once this juice , I'll watch Titania when she is asleep And drop the liquor of it in her eyes .
The next thing then she waking looks upon , Be it on lion , bear , or wolf , or bull , On meddling monkey or on busy ape , She shall pursue it with the soul of love .
And ere I take this charm from of her sight , As I can take it with another herb , I'll make her render up her page to me .
But who comes here ?
I love thee not , therefore pursue me not .
Where is Lysander and fair Hermia ?
The one I'll stay , the other stayeth me .
Thou told'st me they were stol'n unto this wood .
And here am I , and wood within this wood , Because I can not meet my Hermia .
Hence , get thee gone , and follow me no more .
You draw me , you hard-hearted adamant .
But yet you draw not iron , for my heart Is true as steel .
Leave you your power to draw , And I shall have no power to follow you .
Do I entice you ?
Do I speak you fair ?
Or rather , do I not in plainest truth Tell you I do not , nor I can not , love you ?
And even for that do I love you the more .
I am your spaniel .
And , Demetrius , The more you beat me , I will fawn on you .
Use me but as your spaniel , spurn me , strike me , Neglect me , lose me .
Only give me leave , Unworthy as I am , to follow you .
For I am sick when I do look on thee .
And I am sick when I look not on you .
Your virtue is my privilege .
Nor doth this wood lack worlds of company , For you in my respect are all the world .
Then how can it be said I am alone When all the world is here to look on me ?
I'll run from thee and hide me in the brakes , And leave thee to the mercy of wild beasts .
The wildest hath not such a heart as you .
Let me go .
Or if thou follow me , do not believe But I shall do thee mischief in the wood .
Ay , in the temple , in the town , the field You do me mischief .
Fie , Demetrius !
Your wrongs do set a scandal on my sex .
We can not fight for love as men may do .
I'll follow thee and make a heaven of hell , To die upon the hand I love so well .
Fare thee well , nymph .
Ere he do leave this grove , Thou shalt fly him and he shall seek thy love .
Hast thou the flower there ?
Welcome , wanderer .
Ay , there it is .
I pray thee , give it me .
Thanks , good Egeus .
What's the news with thee ?
Full of vexation come I with complaint Against my child , my daughter Hermia. , Stand forth , Demetrius. , My noble lord , This man hath my consent to marry her. , Stand forth , Lysander. , And my gracious duke , This man hath bewitched the bosom of my child. , Thou , thou , Lysander , thou hast given her rhymes , And interchanged love tokens with my child .
Thou hast by moonlight at her window sung With feigning voice verses of feigning love , And stol'n the impression of her fantasy With bracelets of thy hair , rings , gauds , conceits , Knacks , trifles , nosegays , sweetmeats , messengers Of strong prevailment in unhardened youth .
With cunning hast thou filched my daughter's heart , Turned her obedience ( which is due to me ) To stubborn harshness. , And , my gracious duke , Be it so she will not here before your grace Consent to marry with Demetrius , I beg the ancient privilege of Athens .
As she is mine , I may dispose of her , Which shall be either to this gentleman Or to her death , according to our law Immediately provided in that case .
What say you , Hermia ?
Demetrius is a worthy gentleman .
There sleeps Titania sometime of the night , Lulled in these flowers with dances and delight .
And there the snake throws her enameled skin , Weed wide enough to wrap a fairy in .
And with the juice of this I'll streak her eyes And make her full of hateful fantasies .
Fear not , my lord .
Your servant shall do so .
Hence , away !
Now all is well .
One aloof stand sentinel .
What thou seest when thou dost wake , Do it for thy true love take .
Wake when some vile thing is near .
Be it so , Lysander .
Find you out a bed , For I upon this bank will rest my head .
One heart , one bed , two bosoms , and one troth .
Nay , good Lysander .
Do not lie so near .
I mean that my heart unto yours is knit So that but one heart we can make of it .
Then by your side no bed room me deny .
And , good night , sweet friend .
Thy love ne'er alter till thy sweet life end !
Amen , amen to that fair prayer , say I .
Here is my bed .
Pretty soul !
Stay , though thou kill me , sweet Demetrius .
I charge thee , hence , and do not haunt me thus .
O , wilt thou darkling leave me ?
Do not so .
Stay , on thy peril .
I alone will go .
Oh , I am out of breath in this fond chase .
The more my prayer , the lesser is my grace .
Happy is Hermia , wheresoe'er she lies , For she hath blessed and attractive eyes .
How came her eyes so bright ?
Not with salt tears .
If so , my eyes are oftener washed than hers .
No , no , I am as ugly as a bear , For beasts that meet me run away for fear .
Therefore no marvel though Demetrius Do , as a monster , fly my presence thus .
What wicked and dissembling glass of mine Made me compare with Hermia's sphery eyne ?
Do not say so , Lysander .
Say not so .
What though he love your Hermia ?
Lord , what though ?
Content with Hermia ?
No .
I do repent The tedious minutes I with her have spent .
Not Hermia but Helena I love .
Things growing are not ripe until their season .
So I , being young , till now ripe not to reason .
Is 't not enough , is 't not enough , young man , That I did never , no , nor never can , Deserve a sweet look from Demetrius ' eye , But you must flout my insufficiency ?
Good troth , you do me wrong , good sooth , you do , In such disdainful manner me to woo .
But fare you well .
Perforce I must confess I thought you lord of more true gentleness .
Oh , that a lady of one man refused Should of another therefore be abused !
Are we all met ?
Pat , pat .
And here's a marvelous convenient place for our rehearsal .
This green plot shall be our stage , this hawthorn-brake our tiring-house , and we will do it in action as we will do it before the duke .
Peter Quince , What sayest thou , bully Bottom ?
There are things in this comedy of Pyramus and Thisbe that will never please .
First , Pyramus must draw a sword to kill himself , which the ladies can not abide .
How answer you that ?
I believe we must leave the killing out , when all is done .
Not a whit .
I have a device to make all well .
Write me a prologue , and let the prologue seem to say we will do no harm with our swords , and that Pyramus is not killed indeed .
And for the more better assurance , tell them that I , Pyramus , am not Pyramus , but Bottom the weaver .
This will put them out of fear .
Well .
We will have such a prologue , and it shall be written in eight and six .
No , make it two more .
Let it be written in eight and eight .
Will not the ladies be afeard of the lion ?
I fear it , I promise you .
For there is not a more fearful wildfowl than your lion living .
Therefore another prologue must tell he is not a lion .
Nay , you must name his name , and half his face must be seen through the lion's neck .
For , you know , Pyramus and Thisbe meet by moonlight .
So is Lysander .
In himself he is .
But in this kind , wanting your father's voice , The other must be held the worthier .
I would my father looked but with my eyes .
Rather your eyes must with his judgment look .
I do entreat your grace to pardon me .
I know not by what power I am made bold Nor how it may concern my modesty In such a presence here to plead my thoughts , But I beseech your grace that I may know The worst that may befall me in this case , If I refuse to wed Demetrius .
Therefore , fair Hermia , question your desires .
Know of your youth .
Doth the moon shine that night we play our play ?
A calendar , a calendar !
Look in the almanac .
Find out moonshine , find out moonshine !
What say you , Bottom ?
And let him hold his fingers thus , and through that cranny shall Pyramus and Thisbe whisper .
If that may be then all is well .
Come , sit down , every mother's son , and rehearse your parts. , Pyramus , you begin .
When you have spoken your speech , enter into that brake. , And so everyone according to his cue .
Speak , Pyramus. , Thisbe , stand forth .
Ay , marry , must you .
For you must understand he goes but to see a noise that he heard , and is to come again .
Ninus ' tomb , " man .
Why , you must not speak that yet .
You speak all your part at once , cues and all. , Pyramus , enter .
It is "never tire." Oh .
Oh , monstrous !
Oh , strange !
We are haunted .
Fly , masters !
I'll follow you .
Sometime a horse I'll be , sometime a hound , A hog , a headless bear , sometime a fire .
And neigh , and bark , and grunt , and roar , and burn , Like horse , hound , hog , bear , fire , at every turn .
Why do they run away ?
O Bottom , thou art changed !
What do I see on thee ?
What do you see ?
You see an ass head of your own , do you ?
Bless thee , Bottom , bless thee .
Thou art translated .
But I will not stir from this place , do what they can .
I will walk up and down here and I will sing , that they shall hear I am not afraid .
For indeed , who would set his wit to so foolish a bird ?
Methinks , mistress , you should have little reason for that .
And yet , to say the truth , reason and love keep little company together nowadays .
The more the pity that some honest neighbors will not make them friends .
Thou art as wise as thou art beautiful .
Not so , neither .
But if I had wit enough to get out of this wood , I have enough to serve mine own turn .
I am a spirit of no common rate .
Therefore go with me .
And I will purge thy mortal grossness so That thou shalt like an airy spirit go. , Peaseblossom , Cobweb , Moth , and Mustardseed !
Ready .
And I .
And I .
And I .
Where shall we go ?
Be kind and courteous to this gentleman .
Hop in his walks and gambol in his eyes .
Feed him with apricoks and dewberries , With purple grapes , green figs , and mulberries .
And pluck the wings from painted butterflies To fan the moonbeams from his sleeping eyes .
Nod to him , elves , and do him courtesies .
Hail , mortal .
Hail .
Hail .
Hail .
I cry your worships ' mercy , heartily. , I beseech your worship's name .
Cobweb .
I shall desire you of more acquaintance , good Master Cobweb .
If I cut my finger , I shall make bold with you. , Your name , honest gentleman ?
Peaseblossom .
I pray you , commend me to Mistress Squash , your mother , and to Master Peascod , your father .
Good Master Peaseblossom , I shall desire you of more acquaintance too. , Your name , I beseech you , sir ?
Mustardseed .
Good Master Mustardseed , I know your patience well .
That same cowardly , giantlike ox-beef hath devoured many a gentleman of your house .
I promise you your kindred hath made my eyes water ere now .
I desire you of more acquaintance , good Master Mustardseed .
Come , wait upon him .
Lead him to my bower .
The moon methinks looks with a watery eye .
And when she weeps , weeps every little flower , Lamenting some enforced chastity .
Tie up my love's tongue .
Bring him silently .
Here comes my messenger. , How now , mad spirit ?
What night-rule now about this haunted grove ?
My mistress with a monster is in love .
I led them on in this distracted fear And left sweet Pyramus translated there .
When in that moment so it came to pass , Titania waked and straightway loved an ass .
This falls out better than I could devise .
But hast thou yet latched the Athenian's eyes With the love juice , as I did bid thee do ?
I took him sleeping , that is finished too , And the Athenian woman by his side , That , when he waked , of force she must be eyed .
Oh , why rebuke you him that loves you so ?
Lay breath so bitter on your bitter foe .
If thou hast slain Lysander in his sleep , Being o'er shoes in blood , plunge in the deep , And kill me too .
The sun was not so true unto the day As he to me .
Would he have stolen away From sleeping Hermia ?
It can not be but thou hast murdered him .
So should a murderer look , so dead , so grim .
So should the murdered look , and so should I , Pierced through the heart with your stern cruelty .
Yet you , the murderer , look as bright , as clear , As yonder Venus in her glimmering sphere .
What's this to my Lysander ?
Where is he ?
Ah , good Demetrius , wilt thou give him me ?
Hast thou slain him then ?
O brave touch !
Could not a worm , an adder , do so much ?
An adder did it , for with doubler tongue Than thine , thou serpent , never adder stung .
I am not guilty of Lysander's blood .
Nor is he dead , for aught that I can tell .
I pray thee , tell me then that he is well .
An if I could , what should I get therefore ?
Relent , sweet Hermia , And , Lysander , yield Thy crazed title to my certain right .
You have her father's love , Demetrius .
And she is mine , and all my right of her I do estate unto Demetrius .
A privilege never to see me more .
And from thy hated presence part I so .
See me no more , whether he be dead or no .
Here therefore for a while I will remain .
And laid the love juice on some true love's sight .
About the wood go swifter than the wind , And Helena of Athens look thou find , All fancy-sick she is and pale of cheer , With sighs of love , that costs the fresh blood dear .
Flower of this purple dye , Hit with Cupid's archery , Sink in apple of his eye .
When thou wakest , if she be by , Beg of her for remedy .
Shall we their fond pageant see ?
Lord , what fools these mortals be !
Stand aside .
The noise they make Will cause Demetrius to awake .
Then will two at once woo one .
Why should you think that I should woo in scorn ?
Look , when I vow , I weep .
How can these things in me seem scorn to you , Bearing the badge of faith to prove them true ?
You do advance your cunning more and more .
Will you give her o'er ?
Demetrius loves her , and he loves not you .
Crystal is muddy .
I see you all are bent To set against me for your merriment .
You are unkind , Demetrius .
Be not so .
And yours of Helena to me bequeath , Whom I do love and will do till my death .
Lysander , keep thy Hermia .
I will none .
Helen , it is not so .
Look , where thy love comes .
Dark night , that from the eye his function takes , The ear more quick of apprehension makes .
Thou art not by mine eye , Lysander , found .
Mine ear , I thank it , brought me to thy sound But why unkindly didst thou leave me so ?
Why should he stay , whom love doth press to go ?
What love could press Lysander from my side ?
Lysander's love , that would not let him bide , Fair Helena , who more engilds the night Than all yon fiery oes and eyes of light .
Why seek'st thou me ?
Could not this make thee know The hate I bear thee made me leave thee so ?
You speak not as you think .
It can not be .
Lo , she is one of this confederacy !
Now I perceive they have conjoined all three To fashion this false sport , in spite of me. , Injurious Hermia !
Is all the counsel that we two have shared , The sisters ' vows , the hours that we have spent When we have chid the hasty-footed time For parting us , oh , is it all forgot ?
All schooldays ' friendship , childhood innocence ?
We , Hermia , like two artificial gods , Have with our needles created both one flower , Both on one sampler , sitting on one cushion , Both warbling of one song , both in one key , As if our hands , our sides , voices , and minds , Had been incorporate .
So we grew together , Like to a double cherry , seeming parted But yet an union in partition , Two lovely berries molded on one stem ;
Disdain and scorn ride sparkling in her eyes , Misprizing what they look on , and her wit Values itself so highly that to her All matter else seems weak .
She can not love Nor take no shape nor project of affection She is so self-endeared .
Sure , I think so , And therefore certainly it were not good She knew his love , lest she make sport at it .
Why , you speak truth .
So turns she every man the wrong side out And never gives to truth and virtue that Which simpleness and merit purchaseth .
But who dare tell her so ?
If I should speak , She would mock me into air .
O , she would laugh me Out of myself , press me to death with wit .
Therefore let Benedick , like covered fire , Consume away in sighs , waste inwardly .
It were a better death than die with mocks , Which is as bad as die with tickling .
No , rather I will go to Benedick And counsel him to fight against his passion ; And truly I'll devise some honest slanders To stain my cousin with .
One doth not know How much an ill word may empoison liking .
O , do not do your cousin such a wrong !
She can not be so much without true judgment , Having so swift and excellent a wit As she is prized to have , as to refuse So rare a gentleman as Signior Benedick .
He is the only man of Italy , Always excepted my dear Claudio .
Indeed , he hath an excellent good name .
His excellence did earn it , ere he had it .
When are you married , madam ?
Why , every day , tomorrow .
Come , go in .
I do but stay till your marriage be consummate , and then go I toward Aragon .
I'll bring you thither , my lord , if you'll vouchsafe me .
Nay , that would be as great a soil in the new gloss of your marriage as to show a child his new coat and forbid him to wear it .
I will only be bold with Benedick for his company , for from the crown of his head to the sole of his foot he is all mirth .
He hath twice or thrice cut Cupid's bow-string , and the little hangman dare not shoot at him .
He hath a heart as sound as a bell , and his tongue is the clapper , for what his heart thinks , his tongue speaks .
Gallants , I am not as I have been .
So say I. Methinks you are sadder .
I hope he be in love .
There's no true drop of blood in him to be truly touched with love .
If he be sad , he wants money .
What , sigh for the toothache ?
Yet say I , he is in love .
Unless he have a fancy to this foolery , as it appears he hath , he is no fool for fancy , as you would have it appear he is .
If he be not in love with some woman , there is no believing old signs .
He brushes his hat o ' mornings .
What should that bode ?
Hath any man seen him at the barber's ?
No , but the barber's man hath been seen with him , and the old ornament of his cheek hath already stuffed tennis balls .
Nay , he rubs himself with civet .
Can you smell him out by that ?
You embrace your charge too willingly .
Her mother hath many times told me so .
You have it full , Benedick .
Truly , the lady fathers herself. , Be happy , lady , for you are like an honorable father .
If Signor Leonato be her father , she would not have his head on her shoulders for all Messina , as like him as she is .
I wonder that you will still be talking , Signor Benedick .
Nobody marks you .
What , my dear Lady Disdain !
Are you yet living ?
That's as much as to say , the sweet youth's in love .
The greatest note of it is his melancholy .
And when was he wont to wash his face ?
Yea , or to paint himself ?
For the which I hear what they say of him .
Nay , but his jesting spirit , which is now crept into a lute string and now governed by stops , Indeed , that tells a heavy tale for him .
Conclude , conclude , he is in love .
Nay , but I know who loves him .
She shall be buried with her face upwards .
Yet is this no charm for the toothache. , Old Signior , walk aside with me .
Tis even so .
My lord and brother , God save you .
Good e'en , brother .
If your leisure served , I would speak with you .
In private ?
If it please you .
Yet Count Claudio may hear , for what I would speak of concerns him .
What's the matter ?
You know he does .
I know not that , when he knows what I know .
If there be any impediment , I pray you discover it .
You may think I love you not .
Let that appear hereafter , and aim better at me by that I now will manifest .
For my brother , I think he holds you well , and in dearness of heart hath holp to effect your ensuing marriage , surely suit ill spent and labor ill bestowed .
Why , what's the matter ?
I came hither to tell you ; and , circumstances shortened , for she has been too long a-talking of , the lady is disloyal .
Who , Hero ?
Even she : Leonato's Hero , your Hero , every man's Hero .
Disloyal ?
The word is too good to paint out her wickedness .
I could say she were worse .
Think you of a worse title , and I will fit her to it .
Wonder not till further warrant .
Go but with me tonight , you shall see her chamber window entered , even the night before her wedding day .
If you love her then , tomorrow wed her .
But it would better fit your honor to change your mind .
I will not think it .
If I see anything tonight why I should not marry her , tomorrow in the congregation , where I should wed , there will I shame her .
And as I wooed for thee to obtain her , I will join with thee to disgrace her .
Bear it coldly but till midnight and let the issue show itself .
O day untowardly turned !
O mischief strangely thwarting !
O plague right well prevented !
So will you say when you have seen the sequel .
Are you good men and true ?
Come hither , neighbor Seacole .
God hath blessed you with a good name .
To be a well-favored man is the gift of fortune , but to write and read comes by nature .
Both which , Master Constable , You have .
I knew it would be your answer .
Well , for your favor , sir , why , give God thanks , and make no boast of it , and for your writing and reading , let that appear when there is no need of such vanity .
You are thought here to be the most senseless and fit man for the constable of the watch ; therefore bear you the lantern .
How if he will not stand ?
Why , then , take no note of him , but let him go and presently call the rest of the watch together and thank God you are rid of a knave .
If he will not stand when he is bidden , he is none of the Prince's subjects .
We know what belongs to a watch .
Why , you speak like an ancient and most quiet watchman , for I can not see how sleeping should offend .
Well , you are to call at all the alehouses and bid those that are drunk get them to bed .
How if they will not ?
Why , then , let them alone till they are sober .
If they make you not then the better answer , you may say they are not the men you took them for .
Well , sir .
If we know him to be a thief , shall we not lay hands on him ?
You , constable , are to present the Prince's own person .
If you meet the Prince in the night , you may stay him .
Nay , by 'r Lady , that I think he can not .
Five shillings to one on 't , with any man that knows the statutes , he may stay him , marry , not without the Prince be willing , for indeed the watch ought to offend no man , and it is an offense to stay a man against his will .
By 'r lady , I think it be so .
An there be any matter of weight chances , call up me .
Well , masters , we hear our charge .
Let us go sit here upon the church bench till two , and then all to bed .
One word more , honest neighbors .
I pray you watch about Signior Leonato's door , for the wedding being there tomorrow , there is a great coil tonight .
Adieu , be vigitant , I beseech you .
What Conrade !
Conrade , I say !
Mass , and my elbow itched , I thought there would a scab follow .
I will owe thee an answer for that .
And now forward with thy tale .
Stand thee close , then , under this penthouse , for it drizzles rain , and I will , like a true drunkard , utter all to thee .
Therefore know I have earned of Don John a thousand ducats .
Is it possible that any villainy should be so dear ?
Thou shouldst rather ask if it were possible any villainy should be so rich .
For when rich villains have need of poor ones , poor ones may make what price they will .
I wonder at it .
That shows thou art unconfirmed .
Thou knowest that the fashion of a doublet , or a hat , or a cloak , is nothing to a man .
Yes , it is apparel .
Yes , the fashion is the fashion .
Tush , I may as well say the fool's the fool .
Didst thou not hear somebody ?
No , 'twas the vane on the house .
But art not thou thyself giddy with the fashion too , that thou hast shifted out of thy tale into telling me of the fashion ?
Not so , neither .
But know that I have tonight wooed Margaret , the Lady Hero's gentlewoman , by the name of Hero .
I should first tell thee how the Prince , Claudio and my master , planted and placed and possessed by my master Don John , saw afar off in the orchard this amiable encounter .
Then is courtesy a turncoat .
But it is certain I am loved of all ladies , only you excepted .
And I would I could find in my heart that I had not a hard heart , for truly I love none .
A dear happiness to women .
They would else have been troubled with a pernicious suitor .
I had rather hear my dog bark at a crow than a man swear he loves me .
God keep your Ladyship still in that mind , so some gentle- man or other shall 'scape a predestinate scratched face .
Scratching could not make it worse an 'twere such a face as yours were .
Well , you are a rare parrot-teacher .
A bird of my tongue is better than a beast of yours .
I would my horse had the speed of your tongue and so good a continuer .
I have done .
You always end with a jade's trick .
I know you of old .
That is the sum of all , Leonato. , Signior Claudio and Signior Benedick , my dear friend Leonato hath invited you all .
I tell him we shall stay here at the least a month , and he heartily prays some occasion may detain us longer .
I dare swear he is no hypocrite but prays from his heart .
And thought they Margaret was Hero ?
We charge you , in the Prince's name , stand !
Call up the right Master Constable .
We have here recovered the most dangerous piece of lechery that ever was known in the commonwealth .
And one Deformed is one of them .
I know him ; he wears a lock .
Masters , masters , warrant you .
Masters , never speak , we charge you , let us obey you go with us .
A commodity in question , I warrant you. , Come , we'll obey you .
Good Ursula , wake my cousin Beatrice and desire her to rise .
I will , lady .
And bid her come hither .
Well .
Troth , I think your other rebato were better .
No , pray thee , good Meg , I'll wear this .
By my troth , 's not so good , and I warrant your cousin will say so .
My cousin's a fool , and thou art another .
I'll wear none but this .
I like the new tire within excellently , if the hair were a thought browner ; and your gown's a most rare fashion , i ' faith .
I saw the Duchess of Milan's gown that they praise so .
Oh , that exceeds , they say .
But for a fine , quaint , graceful , and excellent fashion , yours is worth ten on 't .
God give me joy to wear it , for my heart is exceeding heavy .
Twill be heavier soon by the weight of a man .
Of what , lady ?
Is not marriage honorable in a beggar ?
Is not your lord honorable without marriage ?
Good morrow , sweet Hero .
Why , how now ?
Do you speak in the sick tune ?
I am out of all other tune , methinks .
Do you sing it , and I'll dance it .
O illegitimate construction !
These gloves the Count sent me , they are an excellent perfume .
I am stuffed , cousin .
Even since you left it .
Doth not my wit become me rarely ?
It is not seen enough ; you should wear it in your cap .
By my troth , I am sick .
I meant plain holy thistle .
You may think perchance that I think you are in love .
Nay , by 'r Lady , I am not such a fool to think what I list , nor I list not to think what I can , nor indeed I can not think , if I would think my heart out of thinking , that you are in love or that you will be in love or that you can be in love .
Yet Benedick was such another , and now is he become a man .
He swore he would never marry , and yet now , in despite of his heart , he eats his meat without grudging .
And how you may be converted I know not , but methinks you look with your eyes as other women do .
Not a false gallop .
Madam , withdraw : the Prince , the Count , Signor Benedick , Don John , and all the gallants of the town are come to fetch you to church .
Help to dress me , good coz , good Meg , good Ursula .
What would you with me , honest neighbor ?
Marry , this it is , sir .
Yes , in truth it is , sir .
What is it , my good friends ?
Goodman Verges , sir , speaks a little off the matter .
It pleases your Worship to say so , but we are the poor duke's officers .
But truly , for mine own part , if I were as tedious as a king , I could find it in my heart to bestow it all of your worship .
All thy tediousness on me , ah ?
Yea , an 'twere a thousand pound more than 'tis , for I hear as good exclamation on your Worship as of any man in the city , and though I be but a poor man , I am glad to hear it .
Gifts that God gives .
I must leave you .
One word , sir .
Take their examination yourself and bring it me .
I am now in great haste , as it may appear unto you .
Fare you well .
My lord , they stay for you to give your daughter to her husband .
I am ready .
Go , good partner , go , get you to Francis Seacole .
Bid him bring his pen and inkhorn to the jail .
We will spare for no wit , I warrant you .
Here's that shall drive some of them to a noncome .
If you swear , my lord , you shall not be forsworn .
I thank you .
I am not of many words , but I thank you .
Please it your Grace lead on ?
Your hand , Leonato .
We will go together .
Benedick , didst thou note the daughter of Signior Leonato ?
I noted her not , but I looked on her .
Is she not a modest young lady ?
Do you question me as an honest man should do , for my simple true judgment ?
Or would you have me speak after my custom , as being a professed tyrant to their sex ?
No , I pray thee speak in sober judgment .
Why , i ' faith , methinks she's too low for a high praise , too brown for a fair praise , and too little for a great praise .
Only this commendation I can afford her , that were she other than she is , she were unhandsome , and being no other but as she is , I do not like her .
Thou thinkest I am in sport .
I pray thee tell me truly how thou lik'st her .
Come , Friar Francis , be brief , only to the plain form of marriage , and you shall recount their particular duties afterwards .
No .
Lady , you come hither to be married to this count ?
I do .
If either of you know any inward impediment why you should not be conjoined , charge you on your souls to utter it .
Know you any , Hero ?
None , my lord .
Know you any , count ?
I dare make his answer , none .
O , what men dare do !
What men may do !
What men daily do , not knowing what they do !
How now , interjections ?
Why , then , some be of laughing , as , ah , ha , he !
As freely , son , as God did give her me .
And what have I to give you back whose worth May counterpoise this rich and precious gift ?
Nothing , unless you render her again .
Sweet Prince , you learn me noble thankfulness. , There , Leonato , take her back again .
She's but the sign and semblance of her honor .
Behold how like a maid she blushes here !
Oh , what authority and show of truth Can cunning sin cover itself withal !
Comes not that blood as modest evidence To witness simple virtue ?
Would you not swear , All you that see her , that she were a maid By these exterior shows ?
But she is none .
She knows the heat of a luxurious bed .
Her blush is guiltiness , not modesty .
What do you mean , my lord ?
Dear my lord , if you in your own proof Have vanquished the resistance of her youth And made defeat of her virginity , I know what you would say : if I have known her , You will say she did embrace me as a husband , And so extenuate the forehand sin .
And seemed I ever otherwise to you ?
Out on thee , seeming !
Is my lord well , that he doth speak so wide ?
Sweet Prince , why speak not you ?
What should I speak ?
I stand dishonored , that have gone about To link my dear friend to a common stale .
Are these things spoken , or do I but dream ?
Sir , they are spoken , and these things are true .
This looks not like a nuptial .
True !
O God !
Leonato , stand I here ?
Is this the Prince ?
Is this the Prince's brother ?
Is this face Hero's ?
Are our eyes our own ?
All this is so , but what of this , my lord ?
Let me but move one question to your daughter , And by that fatherly and kindly power That you have in her , bid her answer truly .
I charge thee do so , as thou art my child .
Oh , God defend me !
how am I beset ! , What kind of catechizing call you this ?
To make you answer truly to your name .
Is it not Hero ?
Who can blot that name With any just reproach ?
Marry , that can Hero !
Hero itself can blot out Hero's virtue .
What man was he talked with you yesternight Out at your window betwixt twelve and one ?
Now , if you are a maid , answer to this .
I talked with no man at that hour , my lord .
Upon mine honor , Myself , my brother , and this grieved count Did see her , hear her , at that hour last night Talk with a ruffian at her chamber window Who hath indeed , most like a liberal villain , Confessed the vile encounters they have had A thousand times in secret .
There is not chastity enough in language , Without offense , to utter them. , Thus , pretty lady , I am sorry for thy much misgovernment .
Why , how now , cousin !
wherefore sink you down ?
Come , let us go .
These things , come thus to light , Smother her spirits up .
How doth the lady ?
Dead , I think. , Help , uncle ! , Hero , why , Hero !
Uncle !
Signor Benedick !
Friar !
Death is the fairest cover for her shame That may be wished for .
How now , cousin Hero !
Yea , wherefore should she not ?
Wherefore !
Why , doth not every earthly thing Cry shame upon her ?
Grieved I I had but one ?
Chid I for that at frugal Nature's frame ?
O , one too much by thee !
Why had I one ?
Why ever wast thou lovely in my eyes ?
Why had I not with charitable hand Took up a beggar's issue at my gates , Who , smirched thus , and mired with infamy , I might have said , "No part of it is mine ; This shame derives itself from unknown loins" ?
Sir , sir , be patient .
For my part , I am so attired in wonder I know not what to say .
Oh , on my soul , my cousin is belied !
Lady , were you her bedfellow last night ?
No , truly not , although until last night I have this twelvemonth been her bedfellow .
Confirmed , confirmed !
I have marked A thousand blushing apparitions To start into her face , a thousand innocent shames In angel whiteness beat away those blushes , And in her eye there hath appeared a fire To burn the errors that these princes hold Against her maiden truth .
Friar , it can not be .
Thou seest that all the grace that she hath left Is that she will not add to her damnation A sin of perjury .
There is some strange misprision in the princes .
Two of them have the very bent of honor , And if their wisdoms be misled in this , The practice of it lives in John the Bastard , Whose spirits toil in frame of villainies .
I know not .
If they speak but truth of her , These hands shall tear her ; if they wrong her honor , The proudest of them shall well hear of it .
Time hath not yet so dried this blood of mine Nor age so eat up my invention Nor fortune made such havoc of my means Nor my bad life reft me so much of friends But they shall find , awaked in such a kind , Both strength of limb and policy of mind , Ability in means and choice of friends , To quit me of them throughly .
Pause awhile , And let my counsel sway you in this case .
Your daughter here the princes left for dead .
Let her awhile be secretly kept in And publish it that she is dead indeed .
Maintain a mourning ostentation , And on your family's old monument Hang mournful epitaphs and do all rites That appertain unto a burial .
What shall become of this ?
What will this do ?
That is some good .
She , dying , as it must so be maintained , Upon the instant that she was accused , Shall be lamented , pitied and excused Of every hearer .
So will it fare with Claudio .
But if all aim but this be leveled false , The supposition of the lady's death Will quench the wonder of her infamy .
And if it sort not well , you may conceal her , As best befits her wounded reputation , In some reclusive and religious life , Out of all eyes , tongues , minds , and injuries .
Signior Leonato , let the friar advise you .
And though you know my inwardness and love Is very much unto the Prince and Claudio , Yet , by mine honor , I will deal in this As secretly and justly as your soul Should with your body .
Would you buy her , that you enquire after her ?
But speak you this with a sad brow ?
Or do you play the flouting jack , to tell us Cupid is a good hare-finder and Vulcan a rare carpenter ?
Come , in what key shall a man take you to go in the song ?
In mine eye she is the sweetest lady that ever I looked on .
I can see yet without spectacles , and I see no such matter .
But I hope you have no intent to turn husband , have you ?
I would scarce trust myself , though I had sworn the contrary , if Hero would be my wife .
Is 't come to this ?
In faith , hath not the world one man but he will wear his cap with suspicion ?
Look , Don Pedro is returned to seek you .
Tis well consented .
Presently away , For to strange sores strangely they strain the cure. , Come , lady , die to live .
This wedding day Perhaps is but prolonged .
Have patience and endure .
Lady Beatrice , have you wept all this while ?
Yea , and I will weep a while longer .
I will not desire that .
Surely I do believe your fair cousin is wronged .
Ah , how much might the man deserve of me that would right her !
Is there any way to show such friendship ?
A very even way , but no such friend .
May a man do it ?
It is a man's office , but not yours .
I do love nothing in the world so well as you .
Is not that strange ?
As strange as the thing I know not .
I am sorry for my cousin .
By my sword , Beatrice , thou lovest me .
With no sauce that can be devised to it .
I protest I love thee .
Why then , God forgive me .
What offense , sweet Beatrice ?
You have stayed me in a happy hour .
I was about to protest I loved you .
And do it with all thy heart .
I love you with so much of my heart that none is left to protest .
Come , bid me do anything for thee .
Kill Claudio .
Ha !
Not for the wide world .
You kill me to deny it .
Tarry , sweet Beatrice .
I am gone , though I am here .
There is no love in you .
Nay , I pray you let me go .
Beatrice , In faith , I will go .
We'll be friends first .
You dare easier be friends with me than fight with mine enemy .
Is Claudio thine enemy ?
Is he not approved in the height a villain , that hath slandered , scorned , dishonored my kinswoman ?
Oh , that I were a man !
What , bear her in hand until they come to take hands and then , with public accusation , uncovered slander , unmitigated rancor , O God , that I were a man !
I would eat his heart in the marketplace .
Hear me , Beatrice , Talk with a man out at a window !
A proper saying !
Nay , but Beatrice , Sweet Hero , she is wronged , she is slandered , she is undone .
Beat ,
Princes and counties !
Surely , a princely testimony , a goodly count , Count Comfect , a sweet gallant , surely !
Oh , that I were a man for his sake !
Or that I had any friend would be a man for my sake !
But manhood is melted into curtsies , valor into compliment , and men are only turned into tongue , and trim ones too .
He is now as valiant as Hercules that only tells a lie and swears it .
I can not be a man with wishing , therefore I will die a woman with grieving .
Tarry , good Beatrice .
By this hand , I love thee .
Use it for my love some other way than swearing by it .
Enough , I am engaged .
I will challenge him .
I will kiss your hand , and so I leave you .
By this hand , Claudio shall render me a dear account .
Go comfort your cousin .
Which be the malefactors ?
Marry , that am I and my partner .
Let them come before Master Constable .
Yea , marry , let them come before me .
What's your name , friend ?
Borachio .
Pray , write down , "Borachio." , Yours , sirrah ?
I am a gentleman , sir , and my name is Conrade .
Write down "Master Gentleman Conrade." , Masters , do you serve God ?
Yea , sir , we hope .
How answer you for yourselves ?
Marry , sir , we say we are none .
A marvelous witty fellow , I assure you , but I will go about with him. , Come you hither , sirrah , a word in your ear .
Sir , I say to you it is thought you are false knaves .
Sir , I say to you we are none .
Well , stand aside. , 'Fore God , they are both in a ale .
Have you writ down that they are none ?
Master Constable , you go not the way to examine .
You must call forth the watch that are their accusers .
Yea , marry , that's the eftest way. , Let the watch come forth .
This man said , sir , that Don John , the Prince's brother , was a villain .
Write down Prince John a villain .
I do not like thy look , I promise thee .
Marry , that he had received a thousand ducats of Don John for accusing the Lady Hero wrongfully .
Flat burglary as ever was committed .
Yea , by Mass , that it is .
What else , fellow ?
What else ?
This is all .
Prince John is this morning secretly stolen away .
God's my life , where's the Sexton ?
Let him write down the Prince's officer "coxcomb." Come , bind them. , Thou naughty varlet !
Away !
You are an ass , you are an ass !
Dost thou not suspect my place ?
Dost thou not suspect my years ?
If you go on thus , you will kill yourself , And 'tis not wisdom thus to second grief Against yourself .
I pray thee , cease thy counsel , Which falls into mine ears as profitless As water in a sieve .
Bring me a father that so loved his child , Whose joy of her is overwhelmed like mine , And bid him speak of patience .
Therefore give me no counsel .
I pray thee , peace .
I will be flesh and blood , For there was never yet philosopher That could endure the toothache patiently , However they have writ the style of gods And made a push at chance and sufferance .
Yet bend not all the harm upon yourself .
Make those that do offend you suffer too .
There thou speak'st reason .
Nay , I will do so .
My soul doth tell me Hero is belied , And that shall Claudio know ; so shall the Prince And all of them that thus dishonor her .
Here comes the Prince and Claudio hastily .
Good e'en , good e'en .
Good day to both of you .
Hear you , my lords , We have some haste , Leonato .
I would your grace would constrain me to tell .
Amen , if you love her , for the lady is very well worthy .
You speak this to fetch me in , my lord .
By my troth , I speak my thought .
Some haste , my lord !
Well , fare you well , my lord .
Are you so hasty now ?
Well , all is one .
Nay , do not quarrel with us , good old man .
If he could right himself with quarreling , Some of us would lie low .
Who wrongs him ?
Marry , thou dost wrong me , thou dissembler , thou .
Nay , never lay thy hand upon thy sword .
I fear thee not .
Marry , beshrew my hand If it should give your age such cause of fear .
In faith , my hand meant nothing to my sword .
Tush , tush , man , never fleer and jest at me .
I speak not like a dotard nor a fool , As under privilege of age to brag What I have done being young , or what would do Were I not old .
Know , Claudio , to thy head , Thou hast so wronged mine innocent child and me That I am forced to lay my reverence by , And with gray hairs and bruise of many days Do challenge thee to trial of a man .
I say thou hast belied mine innocent child .
Thy slander hath gone through and through her heart , And she lies buried with her ancestors , Oh , in a tomb where never scandal slept Save this of hers , framed by thy villainy .
My villainy ?
Thine , Claudio , thine , I say .
You say not right , old man .
My lord , my lord , I'll prove it on his body if he dare , Despite his nice fence and his active practice , His May of youth and bloom of lustihood .
Away !
I will not have to do with you .
Canst thou so daff me ?
Thou hast killed my child .
If thou kill'st me , boy , thou shalt kill a man .
He shall kill two of us , and men indeed , But that's no matter .
Let him kill one first .
Win me and wear me !
Let him answer me. , Come , follow me , boy .
Sir boy , I'll whip you from your foining fence , Nay , as I am a gentleman , I will .
Brother , Content yourself .
God knows I loved my niece , And she is dead , slandered to death by villains That dare as well answer a man indeed As I dare take a serpent by the tongue. , Boys , apes , braggarts , jacks , milksops !
Brother Anthony ,
Hold you content .
But brother Anthony , Come , 'tis no matter .
Do not you meddle .
Let me deal in this .
Gentlemen both , we will not wake your patience .
My heart is sorry for your daughter's death , But , on my honor , she was charged with nothing But what was true and very full of proof .
My lord , my lord , I will not hear you .
No ?
Come , brother ; away !
I will be heard .
And shall , or some of us will smart for it .
See , see , here comes the man we went to seek .
Now , Signior , what news ?
Welcome , Signior .
You are almost come to part almost a fray .
We had like to have had our two noses snapped off with two old men without teeth .
Leonato and his brother .
What think'st thou ?
Had we fought , I doubt we should have been too young for them .
In a false quarrel there is no true valor .
As I am an honest man , he looks pale. , Art thou sick , or angry ?
killed a cat ?
Thou hast mettle enough in thee to kill care .
Sir , I shall meet your wit in the career , an you charge it against me .
I pray you , choose another subject .
I think he be angry indeed .
If he be , he knows how to turn his girdle .
Shall I speak a word in your ear ?
God bless me from a challenge !
Do me right , or I will protest your cowardice .
You have killed a sweet lady , and her death shall fall heavy on you .
Let me hear from you .
What , a feast , a feast ?
I ' faith , I thank him .
I'll tell thee how Beatrice praised thy wit he other day .
I said thou hadst a fine wit .
True , " said she , "a fine little one." "No , " said I , "a great wit." "Right , " says she , "a great gross one." "Nay , " said I , "a good wit." "Just , " said she , "it hurts nobody." "Nay , " said I , "the gentleman is wise." "Certain , " said she , "a wise gentleman." "Nay , " said I , "he hath the tongues." "That I believe , " said she , "for he swore a thing to me on Monday night , which he forswore on Tuesday morning ; there's a double tongue , there's two tongues." Thus did she an hour together transshape thy particular virtues .
Yea , that she did .
But yet for all that , an if she did not hate him deadly , she would love him dearly .
The old man's daughter told us all .
All , all .
And , moreover , God saw him when he was hid in the garden .
But when shall we set the savage bull's horns on the sensible Benedick's head ?
Yea , and text underneath : "Here dwells Benedick the married man" ?
Fare you well , boy .
You know my mind .
I will leave you now to your gossip-like humor .
You break jests as braggarts do their blades , which , God be thanked , hurt not. , My lord , for your many courtesies I thank you .
I must discontinue your company .
Your brother the Bastard is fled from Messina .
You have among you killed a sweet and innocent lady .
For my Lord Lackbeard there , he and I shall meet , and till then peace be with him .
He is in earnest .
In most profound earnest , and , I'll warrant you , for the love of Beatrice .
And hath challenged thee ?
Most sincerely .
What a pretty thing man is when he goes in his doublet and hose and leaves off his wit !
He is then a giant to an ape ; but then is an ape a doctor to such a man .
But soft you , let me be .
Pluck up , my heart , and be sad .
Did he not say my brother was fled ?
Come you , sir .
If justice can not tame you , she shall ne'er weigh more reasons in her balance .
Nay , an you be a cursing hypocrite once , you must be looked to .
How now ?
Two of my brother's men bound !
Officers , what offense have these men done ?
Marry , sir , they have committed false report ; moreover , they have spoken untruths ; secondarily , they are slanders ; sixth and lastly , they have belied a lady ; thirdly , they have verified unjust things ; and , to conclude , they are lying knaves .
First , I ask thee what they have done ; thirdly , I ask thee what's their offense ; sixth and lastly , why they are committed ; and , to conclude , what you lay to their charge .
I have deceived even your very eyes .
My villainy they have upon record , which I had rather seal with my death than repeat over to my shame .
The lady is dead upon mine and my master's false accusation .
I have drunk poison whiles he uttered it .
Yea , and paid me richly for the practice of it .
He is composed and framed of treachery , And fled he is upon this villainy .
Sweet Hero , now thy image doth appear In the rare semblance that I loved it first .
Here , here comes Master Signior Leonato , and the Sexton too .
Which is the villain ?
Let me see his eyes , That , when I note another man like him , I may avoid him .
Which of these is he ?
If you would know your wronger , look on me .
Art thou the slave that with thy breath hast killed Mine innocent child ?
Yea , even I alone .
No , not so , villain , thou beliest thyself .
I know not how to pray your patience , Yet I must speak .
Choose your revenge yourself .
I can not bid you bid my daughter live , That were impossible , but , I pray you both , Possess the people in Messina here How innocent she died .
And if your love Can labor ought in sad invention , Hang her an epitaph upon her tomb And sing it to her bones .
Sing it tonight .
Tomorrow morning come you to my house , And since you could not be my son-in-law , Be yet my nephew .
My brother hath a daughter , Almost the copy of my child that's dead , And she alone is heir to both of us .
Give her the right you should have given her cousin , And so dies my revenge .
That I love her , I feel .
That she is worthy , I know .
And never could maintain his part but in the force of his will .
That a woman conceived me , I thank her .
That she brought me up , I likewise give her most humble thanks .
I shall see thee , ere I die , look pale with love .
With anger , with sickness , or with hunger , my lord , not with love .
Prove that ever I lose more blood with love than I will get again with drinking , pick out mine eyes with a ballad-maker's pen and hang me up at the door of a brothel house for the sign of blind Cupid .
O noble sir !
Your overkindness doth wring tears from me .
I do embrace your offer ; and dispose For henceforth of poor Claudio .
Tomorrow then I will expect your coming .
Tonight I take my leave .
This naughty man Shall face to face be brought to Margaret , Who I believe was packed in all this wrong , Hired to it by your brother .
I thank thee for thy care and honest pains .
Your worship speaks like a most thankful and reverent youth , and I praise God for you .
God save the foundation !
I leave an arrant knave with your Worship , which I beseech your Worship to correct yourself , for the example of others .
God keep your Worship !
I wish your Worship well .
God restore you to health !
Farewell , my lords .
We look for you tomorrow .
We will not fail .
Tonight I'll mourn with Hero .
Pray thee , sweet Mistress Margaret , deserve well at my hands by helping me to the speech of Beatrice .
To have no man come over me !
A most manly wit , Margaret , it will not hurt a woman .
And so , I pray thee , call Beatrice .
Well , I will call Beatrice to you , who I think hath legs .
And therefore will come .
I mean in singing .
Sweet Beatrice , wouldst thou come when I called thee ?
Yea , Signior , and depart when you bid me .
Oh , stay but till then !
Only foul words , and thereupon I will kiss thee .
Foul words is but foul wind , and foul wind is but foul breath , and foul breath is noisome .
Therefore I will depart unkissed .
Thou hast frighted the word out of his right sense , so forcible is thy wit .
But I must tell thee plainly , Claudio undergoes my challenge , and either I must shortly hear from him , or I will subscribe him a coward .
And I pray thee now tell me , for which of my bad parts didst thou first fall in love with me ?
For them all together , which maintained so politic a state of evil that they will not admit any good part to intermingle with them .
But for which of my good parts did you first suffer love for me ?
Suffer love !
A good epithet !
I do suffer love indeed , for I love thee against my will .
In spite of your heart , I think .
If a man do not erect in this age his own tomb ere he dies , he shall live no longer in monument than the bell rings and the widow weeps .
And how long is that , think you ?
Question : why , an hour in clamor and a quarter in rheum .
Therefore is it most expedient for the wise , if Don Worm , his conscience , find no impediment to the contrary , to be the trumpet of his own virtues , as I am to myself .
So much for praising myself , who , I myself will bear witness , is praiseworthy .
An now tell me , how doth your cousin ?
Very ill , too .
Serve God , love me , and mend .
Madam , you must come to your uncle .
It is proved my Lady Hero hath been falsely accused , the Prince and Claudio mightily abused , and Don John is the author of all , who is fled and gone .
Will you come presently ?
Will you go hear this news , Signior ?
I will live in thy heart , die in thy lap , and be buried in thy eyes , and moreover , I will go with thee to thy uncle's .
Is this the monument of Leonato ?
It is , my lord .
Done to death by slanderous tongues Was the Hero that here lies .
Death , in guerdon of her wrongs , Gives her fame which never dies .
So the life that died with shame Lives in death with glorious fame .
Hang thou there upon the tomb , Praising her when I am dumb .
Now , music , sound , and sing your solemn hymn .
Now , unto thy bones good night !
Yearly will I do this rite .
Good morrow , masters .
Put your torches out .
The wolves have preyed , and look , the gentle day , Before the wheels of Phoebus , round about Dapples the drowsy east with spots of grey .
Good morrow , masters .
Did I not tell you she was innocent ?
So are the Prince and Claudio , who accused her Upon the error that you heard debated .
Well , I am glad that all things sort so well .
And so am I , being else by faith enforced To call young Claudio to a reckoning for it .
Well , daughter , and you gentlewomen all , Withdraw into a chamber by yourselves , And when I send for you , come hither masked .
The Prince and Claudio promised by this hour To visit me. , You know your office , brother .
You must be father to your brother's daughter , And give her to young Claudio .
To do what , Signior ?
That eye my daughter lent her ; 'tis most true .
And I do with an eye of love requite her .
The sight whereof I think you had from me , From Claudio and the Prince .
But what's your will ?
Your answer , sir , is enigmatical .
And my help .
Here comes the Prince and Claudio .
Good morrow to this fair assembly .
Good morrow , Prince ; good morrow , Claudio .
We here attend you .
Are you yet determined Today to marry with my brother's daughter ?
I'll hold my mind were she an Ethiope .
Well , as time shall try .
Well , you temporize with the hours .
Commend me to him and tell him I will not fail him at supper , for indeed he hath made great preparation .
Call her forth , brother .
Here's the friar ready .
Good morrow , Benedick .
I think he thinks upon the savage bull .
Tush , fear not , man .
Here comes other reck'nings .
Which is the lady I must seize upon ?
This same is she , and I do give you her .
No , that you shall not till you take her hand Before this friar and swear to marry her .
Another Hero !
Nothing certainer .
One Hero died defiled , but I do live , And surely as I live , I am a maid .
The former Hero !
Hero that is dead !
She died , my lord , but whiles her slander lived .
All this amazement can I qualify When after that the holy rites are ended I'll tell you largely of fair Hero's death .
Soft and fair , Friar. , Which is Beatrice ?
Do not you love me ?
Why no , no more than reason .
Why then , your uncle and the Prince and Claudio Have been deceived .
They swore you did .
Do not you love me ?
Troth , no , no more than reason .
Why then , my cousin , Margaret , and Ursula Are much deceived , for they did swear you did .
They swore that you were almost sick for me .
They swore that you were well-nigh dead for me .
Tis no such matter .
Then you do not love me ?
No , truly , but in friendly recompense .
Come , cousin , I am sure you love the gentleman .
And here's another , Writ in my cousin's hand , stol'n from her pocket , Containing her affection unto Benedick .
A miracle !
Here's our own hands against our hearts .
Come , I will have thee , but , by this light , I take thee for pity .
I would not deny you , but , by this good day , I yield upon great persuasion , and partly to save your life , for I was told you were in a consumption .
Peace !
I will stop your mouth .
How dost thou , Benedick , the married man ?
I'll tell thee what , Prince : a college of wit-crackers can not flout me out of my humor .
Dost thou think I care for a satire or an epigram ?
No .
First , of my word !
Therefore play , music. , Prince , thou art sad .
Get thee a wife , get thee a wife .
To the tuition of God .
From my house , if I had it , The sixth of July .
My liege , your highness now may do me good .
My love is thine to teach .
Teach it but how , And thou shalt see how apt it is to learn Any hard lesson that may do thee good .
Hath Leonato any son , my lord ?
No child but Hero ; she's his only heir .
Dost thou affect her , Claudio ?
If thou dost love fair Hero , cherish it , And I will break with her and with her father , And thou shalt have her .
Was 't not to this end That thou began'st to twist so fine a story ?
But lest my liking might too sudden seem , I would have salved it with a longer treatise .
What need the bridge much broader than the flood ?
I will assume thy part in some disguise And tell fair Hero I am Claudio , And in her bosom I'll unclasp my heart And take her hearing prisoner with the force And strong encounter of my amorous tale .
In practice let us put it presently .
Hath he provided this music ?
He is very busy about it .
But , brother , I can tell you strange news that you yet dreamt not of .
Are they good ?
Hath the fellow any wit that told you this ?
A good sharp fellow .
I will send for him , and question him yourself .
He is very near by this .
He was not three leagues off when I left him .
How many gentlemen have you lost in this action ?
But few of any sort , and none of name .
A victory is twice itself when the achiever brings home full numbers .
I find here that Don Pedro hath bestowed much honor on a young Florentine called Claudio .
He hath an uncle here in Messina will be very much glad of it .
No , no , we will hold it as a dream till it appear itself .
But I will acquaint my daughter withal , that she may be the better prepared for an answer if peradventure this be true .
Go you and tell her of it .
Cousins , you know what you have to do. , O , I cry you mercy , friend .
Go you with me and I will use your skill. , Good cousin , have a care this busy time .
What the goodyear , my lord , why are you thus out of measure sad ?
Therefore the sadness is without limit .
You should hear reason .
I can not hide what I am .
Yea , but you must not make the full show of this till you may do it without controlment .
You have of late stood out against your brother , and he hath ta'en you newly into his grace , where it is impossible you should take true root but by the fair weather that you make yourself .
It is needful that you frame the season for your own harvest .
I had rather be a canker in a hedge than a rose in his grace , and it better fits my blood to be disdained of all than to fashion a carriage to rob love from any .
In this , though I can not be said to be a flattering honest man , it must not be denied but I am a plain-dealing villain .
In the meantime , let me be that I am , and seek not to alter me .
Can you make no use of your discontent ?
I make all use of it , for I use it only .
Who comes here ?
What news , Borachio ?
What is he for a fool that betroths himself to unquietness ?
Marry , it is your brother's right hand .
Who ?
The most exquisite Claudio ?
Even he .
Marry , on Hero , the daughter and heir of Leonato .
A very forward March-chick !
How came you to this ?
Being entertained for a perfumer , as I was smoking a musty room , comes me the Prince and Claudio , hand in hand , in sad conference .
Come , come , let us thither .
This may prove food to my displeasure .
If I can cross him any way , I bless myself every way .
You are both sure , and will assist me ?
To the death , my lord .
Let us to the great supper .
We'll wait upon your lordship .
Was not Count John here at supper ?
I saw him not .
How tartly that gentleman looks !
I never can see him but I am heartburned an hour after .
He is of a very melancholy disposition .
He were an excellent man that were made just in the midway between him and Benedick .
The one is too like an image and says nothing , and the other too like my lady's eldest son , evermore tattling .
Then half Signor Benedick's tongue in Count John's mouth , and half Count John's melancholy in Signor Benedick's face , With a good leg and a good foot , uncle , and money enough in his purse , such a man would win any woman in the world , if he could get her goodwill .
By my troth , niece , thou wilt never get thee a husband if thou be so shrewd of thy tongue .
In faith , she's too curst .
You may light on a husband that hath no beard .
What should I do with him ?
Well then , go you into hell ?
No , but to the gate , and there will the devil meet me like an old cuckold with horns on his head , and say , "Get you to heaven , Beatrice , get you to heaven ; here's no place for you maids." So deliver I up my apes and away to Saint Peter .
For the heavens , he shows me where the bachelors sit , and there live we as merry as the day is long .
Not till God make men of some other metal than earth .
Would it not grieve a woman to be overmastered with a piece of valiant dust ?
To make an account of her life to a clod of wayward marl ?
No , uncle , I'll none .
If the Prince be too important , tell him there is measure in everything , and so dance out the answer .
For hear me , Hero , wooing , wedding , and repenting is as a Scotch jig , a measure , and a cinquepace .
Cousin , you apprehend passing shrewdly .
I have a good eye , uncle .
I can see a church by daylight .
The revelers are entering , brother .
Make good room .
Lady , will you walk a bout with your friend ?
So you walk softly , and look sweetly , and say nothing , I am yours for the walk , and especially when I walk away .
And when please you to say so ?
When I like your favor , for God defend the lute should be like the case !
My visor is Philemon's roof ; within the house is Jove .
Speak low if you speak love .
Well , I would you did like me .
Which is one ?
I say my prayers aloud .
I love you the better ; the hearers may cry "Amen." God match me with a good dancer !
Amen .
No more words .
The clerk is answered .
At a word , I am not .
I know you by the waggling of your head .
To tell you true , I counterfeit him .
You could never do him so ill-well unless you were the very man .
Here's his dry hand up and down .
You are he , you are he .
At a word , I am not .
Come , come , do you think I do not know you by your excellent wit ?
Can virtue hide itself ?
Go to , mum , you are he .
Graces will appear , and there's an end .
Will you not tell me who told you so ?
No , you shall pardon me .
Nor will you not tell me who you are ?
Not now .
That I was disdainful and that I had my good wit out of The Hundred Merry Tales !
Well this was Signor Benedick that said so .
What's he ?
I am sure you know him well enough .
Not I , believe me .
Did he never make you laugh ?
In great measure .
There are no faces truer than those that are so washed .
How much better is it to weep at joy than to joy at weeping !
There was none such in the army of any sort .
What is he that you ask for , niece ?
My cousin means Signor Benedick of Padua .
Oh , he's returned , and as pleasant as ever he was .
I pray you , what is he ?
Why , he is the Prince's jester , a very dull fool , only his gift is in devising impossible slanders .
I am sure he is in the fleet .
I would he had boarded me .
When I know the gentleman , I'll tell him what you say .
Do , do .
He'll but break a comparison or two on me , which , peradventure not marked or not laughed at , strikes him into melancholy , and then there's a partridge wing saved , for the fool will eat no supper that night .
We must follow the leaders .
In every good thing .
Nay , if they lead to any ill , I will leave them at the next turning .
And that is Claudio .
You know me well .
I am he .
Signor , you are very near my brother in his love .
He is enamored on Hero .
I pray you , dissuade him from her .
How know you he loves her ?
I heard him swear his affection .
So did I too , and he swore he would marry her tonight .
Come , let us to the banquet .
Thus answer I in the name of Benedick , But hear these ill news with the ears of Claudio .
Tis certain so , the Prince woos for himself .
Friendship is constant in all other things Save in the office and affairs of love .
Therefore all hearts in love use their own tongues .
Let every eye nogetiate for itself And trust no agent , for beauty is a witch Against whose charms faith melteth into blood .
Farewell , therefore , Hero .
Count Claudio ?
Yea , the same .
Come , will you go with me ?
Whither ?
I wish him joy of her .
Why , that's spoken like an honest drover ; so they sell bullocks .
But did you think the Prince would have served you thus ?
I pray you , leave me .
Ho , now you strike like the blind man .
Twas the boy that stole your meat , and you'll beat the post .
If it will not be , I'll leave you .
Alas , poor hurt fowl , now will he creep into sedges .
But that my Lady Beatrice should know me , and not know me !
The Prince's fool !
Ha , it may be I go under that title because I am merry .
Yea , but so I am apt to do myself wrong .
I am not so reputed !
Well , I'll be revenged as I may .
Now , Signior , where's the Count ?
Did you see him ?
Troth , my lord , I have played the part of Lady Fame .
I found him here as melancholy as a lodge in a warren .
What's his fault ?
The flat transgression of a schoolboy who , being overjoyed with finding a birds ' nest , shows it his companion , and he steals it .
Wilt thou make a trust a transgression ?
The transgression is in the stealer .
The Lady Beatrice hath a quarrel to you .
The gentleman that danced with her told her she is much wronged by you .
She speaks poniards , and every word stabs .
If her breath were as terrible as her terminations , there were no living near her ; she would infect to the north star .
I would not marry her , though she were endowed with all that Adam had left him before he transgressed .
Come , talk not of her .
Look , here she comes .
Will your grace command me any service to the world's end ?
I will go on the slightest errand now to the Antipodes that you can devise to send me on .
Marry , once before he won it of me with false dice .
Therefore your Grace may well say I have lost it .
You have put him down , lady , you have put him down .
Why , how now , Count , wherefore are you sad ?
Not sad , my lord .
How then , sick ?
Neither , my lord .
The Count is neither sad , nor sick , nor merry , nor well , but civil count , civil as an orange , and something of that jealous complexion .
I have broke with her father and his goodwill obtained .
Name the day of marriage , and God give thee joy .
Count , take of me my daughter , and with her my fortunes .
His grace hath made the match , and all grace say "Amen" to it .
Speak , Count , 'tis your cue .
I give away myself for you and dote upon the exchange .
In faith , lady , you have a merry heart .
Yea , my lord .
I thank it , poor fool , it keeps on the windy side of care .
My cousin tells him in his ear that he is in her heart .
And so she doth , cousin .
Good Lord for alliance !
Thus goes everyone to the world but I , and I am sunburnt .
I may sit in a corner and cry , "Heigh-ho for a husband ! " Lady Beatrice , I will get you one .
I would rather have one of your father's getting .
Hath your grace ne'er a brother like you ?
Your father got excellent husbands , if a maid could come by them .
Will you have me , lady ?
No , my lord , unless I might have another for working days .
Your Grace is too costly to wear every day .
But I beseech your Grace pardon me .
I was born to speak all mirth and no matter .
Niece , will you look to those things I told you of ?
I cry you mercy , uncle. , By your Grace's pardon .
By my troth , a pleasant-spirited lady .
There's little of the melancholy element in her , my lord .
She is never sad but when she sleeps , and not ever sad then , for I have heard my daughter say she hath often dreamed of unhappiness and waked herself with laughing .
She can not endure to hear tell of a husband .
Oh , by no means .
She mocks all her wooers out of suit .
She were an excellent wife for Benedict .
O Lord , my lord , if they were but a week married , they would talk themselves mad .
County Claudio , when mean you to go to church ?
Tomorrow , my lord .
My lord , I am for you , though it cost me ten nights ' watchings .
And I , my lord .
And you too , gentle Hero ?
I will do any modest office , my lord , to help my cousin to a good husband .
And Benedick is not the unhopefulest husband that I know .
Thus far can I praise him : he is of a noble strain , of approved valor , and confirmed honesty .
Go in with me , and I will tell you my drift .
Faith , niece , you tax Signor Benedick too much , but he'll be meet with you , I doubt it not .
He hath done good service , lady , in these wars .
You had musty victual , and he hath holp to eat it .
And a good soldier too , lady .
A lord to a lord , a man to a man , stuffed with all honorable virtues .
He is no less than a stuffed man .
But for the stuffing , well , we are all mortal .
You must not , sir , mistake my niece .
There is a kind of merry war betwixt Signor Benedick and her .
They never meet but there's a skirmish of wit between them .
He hath every month a new sworn brother .
Is 't possible ?
It is so .
The Count Claudio shall marry the daughter of Leonato .
Yea , my lord , but I can cross it .
Any bar , any cross , any impediment will be med'cinable to me .
I am sick in displeasure to him , and whatsoever comes athwart his affection ranges evenly with mine .
How canst thou cross this marriage ?
Not honestly , my lord , but so covertly that no dishonesty shall appear in me .
Show me briefly how .
I think I told your lordship a year since how much I am in the favor of Margaret , the waiting gentlewoman to Hero .
I remember .
I can , at any unseasonable instant of the night , appoint her to look out at her lady's chamber window .
What life is in that to be the death of this marriage ?
The poison of that lies in you to temper .
What proof shall I make of that ?
Proof enough to misuse the Prince , to vex Claudio , to undo Hero , and kill Leonato .
Look you for any other issue ?
Only to despite them , I will endeavor anything .
Go then , find me a meet hour to draw Don Pedro and the Count Claudio alone .
Tell them that you know that Hero loves me .
Intend a kind of zeal both to the Prince and Claudio , as in love of your brother's honor , who hath made this match , and his friend's reputation , who is thus like to be cozened with the semblance of a maid , that you have discovered thus .
They will scarcely believe this without trial .
Be you constant in the accusation , and my cunning shall not shame me .
I will presently go learn their day of marriage .
Boy !
Signior ?
In my chamber window lies a book .
Bring it hither to me in the orchard .
I am here already , sir .
I know that , but I would have thee hence and here again .
I have known when there was no music with him but the drum and the fife , and now had he rather hear the tabor and the pipe .
I have known when he would have walked ten mile afoot to see a good armor , and now will he lie ten nights awake carving the fashion of a new doublet .
I can not tell ; I think not .
I will not be sworn but love may transform me to an oyster , but I'll take my oath on it , till he have made an oyster of me , he shall never make me such a fool .
Ha !
The Prince and Monsieur Love !
I will hide me in the arbor .
Come , shall we hear this music ?
Yea , my good lord .
Come , Balthasar , we'll hear that song again .
O , good my lord , tax not so bad a voice To slander music anymore than once .
I pray thee , sing , and let me woo no more .
Note this before my notes : There's not a note of mine that's worth the noting .
strange that sheeps ' guts should hale souls out of men's bodies ?
By my troth , a good song .
And an ill singer , my lord .
Yea , marry , dost thou hear , Balthasar ?
I pray thee , get us some excellent music , for tomorrow night we would have it at the Lady Hero's chamber window
The best I can , my lord .
Do so .
Farewell .
Come hither , Leonato .
What was it you told me of today , that your niece Beatrice was in love with Signor Benedick ?
Oh , ay .
sits. , I did never think that lady would have loved any man .
No , nor I neither , but most wonderful that she should so dote on Signor Benedick , whom she hath in all outward behaviors seemed ever to abhor .
By my troth , my lord , I can not tell what to think of it , but that she loves him with an enraged affection , it is past the infinite of thought .
May be she doth but counterfeit .
Faith , like enough .
O God !
Counterfeit ?
There was never counterfeit of passion came so near the life of passion as she discovers it .
Why , what effects of passion shows she ?
What effects , my lord ?
She will sit you , you heard my daughter tell you how .
She did indeed .
How , how I pray you ?
You amaze me .
I would have thought her spirit had been invincible against all assaults of affection .
I would have sworn it had , my lord , especially against Benedick .
Hath she made her affection known to Benedick ?
No , and swears she never will .
That's her torment .
Tis true indeed , so your daughter says .
My daughter tells us all .
Now you talk of a sheet of paper , I remember a pretty jest your daughter told .
Oh , when she had writ it and was reading it over , she found "Benedick" and "Beatrice" between the sheet ?
That .
O , she tore the letter into a thousand halfpence , railed at herself that she should be so immodest to write to one that she knew would flout her .
It is very true .
It were good that Benedick knew of it by some other , if she will not discover it .
To what end ?
He would make but a sport of it and torment the poor lady worse .
An he should , it were an alms to hang him .
She's an excellent sweet lady , and , out of all suspicion , she is virtuous .
And she is exceeding wise .
Oh , my lord , wisdom and blood combating in so tender a body , we have ten proofs to one that blood hath the victory .
I am sorry for her , as I have just cause , being her uncle and her guardian .
I would she had bestowed this dotage on me .
I would have daffed all other respects and made her half myself .
I pray you tell Benedick of it and hear what he will say .
Were it good , think you ?
Hero thinks surely she will die , for she says she will die if he love her not , and she will die ere she make her love known , and she will die if he woo her rather than she will bate one breath of her accustomed crossness .
She doth well .
If she should make tender of her love , 'tis very possible he'll scorn it , for the man , as you know all , hath a contemptible spirit .
He is a very proper man .
Before God , and in my mind , very wise .
He doth indeed show some sparks that are like wit .
Very easily possible .
I see , lady , the gentleman is not in your books .
No .
But I pray you , who is his companion ?
He is most in the company of the right noble Claudio .
O Lord , he will hang upon him like a disease !
God help the noble Claudio !
If he have caught the Benedick , it will cost him a thousand pound ere a be cured .
I will hold friends with you , lady .
Do , good friend .
You will never run mad , niece .
No , not till a hot January .
Don Pedro is approached .
If he do fear God , he must necessarily keep peace .
If he break the peace , he ought to enter into a quarrel with fear and trembling .
Well , I am sorry for your niece .
Shall we go seek Benedick and tell him of her love ?
Against my will , I am sent to bid you come in to dinner .
Fair Beatrice , I thank you for your pains .
I took no more pains for those thanks than you take pains to thank me .
If it had been painful , I would not have come .
You take pleasure then in the message ?
Yea , just so much as you may take upon a knife's point and choke a daw withal .
You have no stomach , Signior .
Fare you well .
Ha !
Against my will I am sent to bid you come in to dinner." There's a double meaning in that .
I took no more pains for those thanks than you took pains to thank me." That's as much as to say , "Any pains that I take for you is as easy as thanks." If I do not take pity of her , I am a villain .
If I do not love her , I am a Jew .
Good Margaret , run thee to the parlor .
There shalt thou find my cousin Beatrice Proposing with the Prince and Claudio .
Whisper her ear and tell her I and Ursula Walk in the orchard , and our whole discourse Is all of her .
Say that thou overheardst us , And bid her steal into the pleached bower Where honeysuckles ripened by the sun Forbid the sun to enter , like favorites Made proud by princes , that advance their pride Against that power that bred it .
There will she hide her To listen our propose .
This is thy office .
Bear thee well in it and leave us alone .
I'll make her come , I warrant you , presently .
Now , Ursula , when Beatrice doth come , As we do trace this alley up and down , Our talk must only be of Benedick .
When I do name him , let it be thy part To praise him more than ever man did merit .
My talk to thee must be how Benedick Is sick in love with Beatrice .
Fear you not my part of the dialogue .
But are you sure That Benedick loves Beatrice so entirely ?
So says the Prince and my new-trothed lord .
And did they bid you tell her of it , madam ?
They did entreat me to acquaint her of it , But I persuaded them , if they loved Benedick , To wish him wrestle with affection And never to let Beatrice know of it .
Why did you so ?
Doth not the gentleman Deserve as full as fortunate a bed As ever Beatrice shall couch upon ?
What's the matter , lieutenant ?
I'll beat the knave into a twiggen bottle .
Beat me ?
Dost thou prate , rogue ?
Nay , good lieutenant !
I pray you , sir , hold your hand .
Let me go , sir , or I'll knock you o'er the mazzard .
Come , come , you're drunk .
Drunk ?
Alas , gentlemen , Help , ho ! , Lieutenant , sir , Montano , Help , masters ! , Here's a goodly watch indeed !
Who's that which rings the bell ? , Diablo , ho !
The town will rise .
Fie , Fie , lieutenant , You'll be ashamed for ever .
What is the matter here ?
He dies !
Hold , for your lives !
Hold , ho !
Hold !
The general speaks to you .
Hold , for shame !
For Christian shame , put by this barbarous brawl .
He that stirs next to carve for his own rage Holds his soul light , he dies upon his motion .
Silence that dreadful bell , it frights the isle From her propriety .
What is the matter , masters ? , Honest Iago , that looks dead with grieving , Speak , who began this ?
On thy love , I charge thee .
I do not know .
Swords out , and tilting one at other's breasts In opposition bloody .
I can not speak Any beginning to this peevish odds , And would in action glorious I had lost Those legs that brought me to a part of it .
Worthy Montano , you were wont be civil .
What's the matter That you unlace your reputation thus And spend your rich opinion for the name Of a night-brawler ?
Give me answer to it .
Worthy Othello , I am hurt to danger .
Nor know I aught By me that's said or done amiss this night , Unless self-charity be sometimes a vice , And to defend ourselves it be a sin When violence assails us .
Now , by heaven , My blood begins my safer guides to rule , And passion , having my best judgment collied , Assays to lead the way .
Tis monstrous .
Iago , who began 't ?
Touch me not so near .
I had rather have this tongue cut from my mouth Than it should do offence to Michael Cassio .
Yet I persuade myself to speak the truth Shall nothing wrong him .
When I came back , For this was brief , I found them close together At blow and thrust , even as again they were When you yourself did part them .
More of this matter can not I report .
Though Cassio did some little wrong to him , As men in rage strike those that wish them best , Yet surely Cassio , I believe , received From him that fled some strange indignity Which patience could not pass .
I'll make thee an example .
What's the matter , dear ?
All's well , sweeting , Come away to bed. , Myself will be your surgeon .
What , are you hurt , lieutenant ?
Ay , past all surgery .
Marry , heaven forbid !
But thou must needs be sure My spirits and my place have in their power To make this bitter to thee .
Patience , good sir .
What tell'st thou me of robbing ?
Because we come to do you service and you think we are ruffians , you'll have your daughter covered with a Barbary horse .
You'll have your nephews neigh to you .
You'll have coursers for cousins and gennets for germans .
What profane wretch art thou ?
I am one , sir , that comes to tell you your daughter and the Moor are now making the beast with two backs .
Thou art a villain !
You are a senator !
This thou shalt answer .
I know thee , Roderigo .
Sir , I will answer any thing .
Reputation , reputation , reputation !
My reputation , Iago , my reputation !
As I am an honest man , I thought you had received some bodily wound .
There is more sense in that than in reputation .
You have lost no reputation at all unless you repute yourself such a loser .
What , man , there are ways to recover the general again .
Sue to him again and he's yours .
Drunk ?
And speak parrot ?
And squabble ?
Swagger ?
And discourse fustian with one's own shadow ?
O thou invisible spirit of wine , if thou hast no name to be known by , let us call thee devil !
What was he that you followed with your sword ?
What had he done to you ?
I know not .
Is 't possible ?
I remember a mass of things , but nothing distinctly .
A quarrel , but nothing wherefore .
That we should , with joy , pleasance revel and applause , transform ourselves into beasts !
Why , but you are now well enough .
How came you thus recovered ?
One unperfectness shows me another , to make me frankly despise myself .
Come , you are too severe a moraler .
As the time , the place , and the condition of this country stands , I could heartily wish this had not befallen .
But since it is as it is , mend it for your own good .
I will ask him for my place again , he shall tell me I am a drunkard .
Had I as many mouths as Hydra , such an answer would stop them all .
To be now a sensible man , by and by a fool , and presently a beast !
Oh , strange !
Every inordinate cup is unblessed and the ingredient is a devil .
Come , come , good wine is a good familiar creature , if it be well used .
Exclaim no more against it .
And , good lieutenant , I think you think I love you .
I have well approved it , sir .
I drunk !
You or any man living may be drunk at a time , man .
I tell you what you shall do .
Our general's wife is now the general .
Confess yourself freely to her , importune her help to put you in your place again .
She is of so free , so kind , so apt , so blessed a disposition , she holds it a vice in her goodness not to do more than she is requested .
This broken joint between you and her husband entreat her to splinter , and , my fortunes against any lay worth naming , this crack of your love shall grow stronger than it was before .
You advise me well .
I protest , in the sincerity of love and honest kindness .
I think it freely , and betimes in the morning I will beseech the virtuous Desdemona to undertake for me .
I am desperate of my fortunes if they check me .
You are in the right .
Good night , lieutenant , I must to the watch .
Good night , honest Iago .
And what's he then that says I play the villain ?
When this advice is free I give and honest , Probal to thinking and indeed the course To win the Moor again ?
For 'tis most easy Th ' inclining Desdemona to subdue In any honest suit .
She's framed as fruitful As the free elements .
How am I then a villain To counsel Cassio to this parallel course , Directly to his good ?
When devils will the blackest sins put on They do suggest at first with heavenly shows As I do now .
And by how much she strives to do him good She shall undo her credit with the Moor .
So will I turn her virtue into pitch And out of her own goodness make the net That shall enmesh them all .
How now , Roderigo !
My money is almost spent , I have been tonight exceedingly well cudgeled , and I think the issue will be I shall have so much experience for my pains .
And so , with no money at all and a little more wit , return again to Venice .
How poor are they that have not patience !
What wound did ever heal but by degrees ?
Thou know'st we work by wit and not by witchcraft , And wit depends on dilatory time .
Does't not go well ?
In troth , 'tis morning .
Pleasure and action make the hours seem short .
Retire thee , go where thou art billeted .
Nay , get thee gone .
Two things are to be done : My wife must move for Cassio to her mistress .
I'll set her on .
Ay , that's the way .
Masters , play here , I will content your pains .
Are these , I pray you , wind instruments ?
Ay , marry , are they , sir .
Oh , thereby hangs a tail .
Whereby hangs a tale , sir ?
Well , sir , we will not .
If you have any music that may not be heard , to 't again .
But , as they say , to hear music the general does not greatly care .
We have none such , sir .
Then put up your pipes in your bag , for I'll away .
Go , vanish into air , away !
Dost thou hear , my honest friend ?
Prithee , keep up thy quillets .
She is stirring , sir .
If she will stir hither , I shall seem to notify unto her .
In happy time , Iago .
You have not been abed , then ?
Why , no .
My suit to her Is that she will to virtuous Desdemona Procure me some access .
I humbly thank you for't .
Good morrow , good Lieutenant .
I am sorry For your displeasure , but all will sure be well .
The general and his wife are talking of it , And she speaks for you stoutly .
The Moor replies That he you hurt is of great fame in Cyprus And great affinity , and that in wholesome wisdom He might not but refuse you .
But he protests he loves you And needs no other suitor but his likings To take the safest occasion by the front To bring you in again .
Yet I beseech you , If you think fit , or that it may be done , Give me advantage of some brief discourse With Desdemona alone .
Pray you come in .
I will bestow you where you shall have time To speak your bosom freely .
I am much bound to you .
These letters give , Iago , to the pilot , And by him do my duties to the senate .
That done , I will be walking on the works , Repair there to me .
Well , my good lord , I'll do 't .
This fortification , gentlemen , shall we see 't ?
We'll wait upon your lordship .
Be thou assured , good Cassio , I will do All my abilities in thy behalf .
Good madam , do .
Do not doubt , Cassio , But I will have my lord and you again As friendly as you were .
You do love my lord .
Ay , but , lady , That policy may either last so long , Or feed upon such nice and waterish diet , Or breed itself so out of circumstances , That , I being absent and my place supplied , My general will forget my love and service .
My lord shall never rest , I'll watch him tame and talk him out of patience .
But if you know not this my manners tell me We have your wrong rebuke .
Do not believe That , from the sense of all civility , I thus would play and trifle with your reverence .
If she be in her chamber or your house , Let loose on me the justice of the state For thus deluding you .
Strike on the tinder , ho !
Give me a taper , call up all my people !
This accident is not unlike my dream , Belief of it oppresses me already .
Light , I say , light !
Farewell , for I must leave you .
It seems not meet , nor wholesome to my place , To be producted ( as , if I stay , I shall ) Against the Moor .
In which regard ,
Therefore be merry , Cassio , For thy solicitor shall rather die Than give thy cause away .
Madam , here comes my lord .
Madam , I'll take my leave .
Why , stay and hear me speak .
Madam , not now .
I am very ill at ease , Unfit for mine own purposes .
Well , do your discretion .
Ha !
I like not that .
What dost thou say ?
Nothing , my lord , or if , I know not what .
Was not that Cassio parted from my wife ?
Cassio , my lord ?
I do believe 'twas he .
How now , my lord ?
I have been talking with a suitor here , A man that languishes in your displeasure .
Who is 't you mean ?
Why , your lieutenant , Cassio .
Good my lord , If I have any grace or power to move you His present reconciliation take .
I prithee , call him back .
Went he hence now ?
Ay , sooth , so humbled That he hath left part of his grief with me To suffer with him .
Good love , call him back .
Not now , sweet Desdemona .
Some other time .
But shall 't be shortly ?
The sooner , sweet , for you .
Shall 't be tonight at supper ?
No , not tonight .
Tomorrow dinner , then ?
Why , then , tomorrow night , or Tuesday morn .
On Tuesday noon , or night , or Wednesday morn .
I prithee name the time , but let it not Exceed three days .
In faith , he's penitent , And yet his trespass , in our common reason ( Save that , they say , the wars must make example Out of her best ) is not , almost , a fault T ' incur a private check .
When shall he come ?
Tell me , Othello .
Trust me , I could do much , Prithee , no more .
Let him come when he will , I will deny thee nothing .
Why , this is not a boon , 'T is as I should entreat you wear your gloves , Or feed on nourishing dishes , or keep you warm , Or sue to you to do a peculiar profit To your own person .
Nay , when I have a suit Wherein I mean to touch your love indeed It shall be full of poise and difficult weight And fearful to be granted .
I will deny thee nothing !
Whereon I do beseech thee , grant me this , To leave me but a little to myself .
Shall I deny you ?
No .
Farewell , my lord .
Farewell , my Desdemona .
I'll come to thee straight .
Perdition catch my soul But I do love thee !
My noble lord , What dost thou say , Iago ?
Did Michael Cassio , when you wooed my lady , Know of your love ?
He did , from first to last .
Why dost thou ask ?
Why of thy thought , Iago ?
I did not think he had been acquainted with her .
Indeed ?
Indeed ?
Ay , indeed !
Discern'st thou aught in that ?
Is he not honest ?
Honest , my lord ?
Honest , ay , honest .
My lord , for aught I know .
What dost thou think ?
Think , my lord ?
Think , my lord ? " Alas , thou echo'st me As if there were some monster in thy thought Too hideous to be shown .
Thou dost mean something .
I heard thee say even now thou lik'st not that When Cassio left my wife .
What didst not like ?
And when I told thee he was of my counsel Of my whole course of wooing , thou cried'st "Indeed ? " And didst contract and purse thy brow together As if thou then hadst shut up in thy brain Some horrible conceit .
If thou dost love me Show me thy thought .
My lord , you know I love you .
I think thou dost .
For Michael Cassio , I dare be sworn , I think , that he is honest .
I think so too .
Men should be what they seem , Or those that be not , would they might seem none !
Certain , men should be what they seem .
Why then I think Cassio's an honest man .
Nay , yet there's more in this .
I prithee speak to me as to thy thinkings , As thou dost ruminate , and give thy worst of thoughts The worst of words .
Utter my thoughts ?
Thou dost conspire against thy friend , Iago , If thou but think'st him wronged and mak'st his ear A stranger to thy thoughts .
What dost thou mean ?
Good name in man and woman , dear my lord , Is the immediate jewel of their souls .
Who steals my purse steals trash .
Tis something , nothing : 'T was mine , 'tis his , and has been slave to thousands .
But he that filches from me my good name Robs me of that which not enriches him And makes me poor indeed .
I'll know thy thoughts .
You can not , if my heart were in your hand , Nor shall not , whilst 'tis in my custody .
Ha !
Oh , beware , my lord , of jealousy !
It is the green-eyed monster which doth mock The meat it feeds on .
Oh , misery !
Poor and content is rich , and rich enough , But riches fineless is as poor as winter To him that ever fears he shall be poor .
Good heaven , the souls of all my tribe defend From jealousy !
Why , why is this ?
Think'st thou I'd make a life of jealousy , To follow still the changes of the moon With fresh suspicions ?
No !
To be once in doubt Is to be resolved .
Tis not to make me jealous To say my wife is fair , feeds well , loves company , Is free of speech , sings , plays , and dances .
Where virtue is , these are more virtuous .
Therefore , as I am bound , Receive it from me .
I speak not yet of proof .
Look to 't .
I know our country disposition well .
In Venice they do let God see the pranks They dare not show their husbands .
Dost thou say so ?
And so she did .
Why , go to then .
She that , so young , could give out such a seeming , To seel her father's eyes up close as oak , He thought 'twas witchcraft .
But I am much to blame .
I humbly do beseech you of your pardon For too much loving you .
I am bound to thee forever .
I see this hath a little dashed your spirits .
Not a jot , not a jot .
Trust me , I fear it has .
I hope you will consider what is spoke Comes from my love .
But I do see you're moved .
I am to pray you not to strain my speech To grosser issues nor to larger reach Than to suspicion .
I will not .
Should you do so , my lord , My speech should fall into such vile success Which my thoughts aimed not at .
Cassio's my worthy friend , My lord , I see you're moved .
No , not much moved .
Farewell , farewell .
If more thou dost perceive , let me know more .
Set on thy wife to observe .
Leave me , Iago .
My lord , I take my leave .
Note if your lady strain his entertainment
That you shall surely find him , Lead to the Sagittary the raised search , And there will I be with him .
It is too true an evil .
Gone she is .
And what's to come of my despised time Is naught but bitterness .
Now , Roderigo , Where didst thou see her ? , Oh , unhappy girl ! , With the Moor , say'st thou ? , Who would be a father ? , How didst thou know 'twas she ? , Oh , she deceives me Past thought ! , What said she to you ? , Get more tapers , Raise all my kindred .
Are they married , think you ?
Truly , I think they are .
Oh , heaven , how got she out ?
Oh , treason of the blood !
Fathers , from hence trust not your daughters ' minds By what you see them act .
Is there not charms By which the property of youth and maidhood May be abused ?
Have you not read , Roderigo , Of some such thing ?
Yes , sir , I have indeed .
I think I can discover him , if you please To get good guard and go along with me .
With any strong or vehement importunity .
Much will be seen in that .
In the meantime , Let me be thought too busy in my fears , As worthy cause I have to fear I am , And hold her free , I do beseech your honor .
Fear not my government .
I once more take my leave .
This fellow's of exceeding honesty And knows all quantities , with a learned spirit , Of human dealings .
If I do prove her haggard , Though that her jesses were my dear heartstrings , I'd whistle her off and let her down the wind To prey at fortune .
Oh , curse of marriage That we can call these delicate creatures ours And not their appetites !
I had rather be a toad And live upon the vapor of a dungeon Than keep a corner in the thing I love For others ' uses .
Yet 'tis the plague to great ones , Prerogatived are they less than the base .
Tis destiny unshunnable , like death .
Even then this forked plague is fated to us When we do quicken .
Look where she comes .
If she be false , heaven mocked itself .
I'll not believe 't .
How now , my dear Othello ?
Your dinner , and the generous islanders By you invited , do attend your presence .
I am to blame .
Why do you speak so faintly ?
Are you not well ?
I have a pain upon my forehead , here .
Why that's with watching , 'twill away again .
Let me but bind it hard , within this hour It will be well .
Come , I'll go in with you .
I am very sorry that you are not well .
My wayward husband hath a hundred times
Wooed me to steal it , but she so loves the token ( For he conjured her she should ever keep it ) That she reserves it evermore about her To kiss and talk to .
I'll have the work ta'en out And give 't Iago .
What he will do with it Heaven knows , not I. I nothing but to please his fantasy .
How now !
What do you here alone ?
Do not you chide .
I have a thing for you .
A thing for me ?
It is a common thing , Ha ?
To have a foolish wife .
Oh , is that all ?
What will you give me now For the same handkerchief ?
What handkerchief ?
What handkerchief ?
Why , that the Moor first gave to Desdemona , That which so often you did bid me steal .
Hast stolen it from her ?
No , but she let it drop by negligence And , to th ' advantage , I being here , took 't up .
Look , here it is .
A good wench , give it me .
What will you do with 't , that you have been so earnest To have me filch it ?
Why , what is that to you ?
If it be not for some purpose of import , Give 't me again .
Poor lady , she'll run mad When she shall lack it .
Go , leave me .
The Moor already changes with my poison .
Look , where he comes .
Not poppy nor mandragora Nor all the drowsy syrups of the world , Shall ever medicine thee to that sweet sleep Which thou owedst yesterday .
False to me ?
I swear 'tis better to be much abused Than but to know 't a little .
How now , my lord !
What sense had I in her stol'n hours of lust ?
I saw 't not , thought it not , it harmed not me .
I slept the next night well , fed well , was free and merry .
I found not Cassio's kisses on her lips .
He that is robbed , not wanting what is stol'n , Let him not know't , and he's not robbed at all .
I am sorry to hear this .
I had been happy if the general camp , Pioneers and all , had tasted her sweet body , So I had nothing known .
Oh , now forever Farewell the tranquil mind !
Farewell content !
Farewell the plumed troops and the big wars That makes ambition virtue !
Oh , farewell !
Farewell the neighing steed and the shrill trump , The spirit-stirring drum , th ' ear-piercing fife , The royal banner , and all quality , Pride , pomp , and circumstance of glorious war !
And O you mortal engines , whose rude throats The immortal Jove's dead clamors counterfeit , Farewell !
Othello's occupation's gone .
Is 't possible , my lord ?
Is 't come to this ?
Make me to see 't , or at the least so prove it That the probation bear no hinge nor loop To hang a doubt on , or woe upon thy life !
Oh , heaven forgive me !
Are you a man ?
Have you a soul or sense ?
God buy you , take mine office .
O monstrous world !
Take note , take note , O world , To be direct and honest is not safe .
Nay , stay .
Thou shouldst be honest .
I should be wise , for honesty's a fool And loses that it works for .
By the world , I think my wife be honest and think she is not .
I think that thou art just and think thou art not .
I'll have some proof .
Her name , that was as fresh As Dian's visage , is now begrimed and black As mine own face .
Would I were satisfied !
I see , sir , you are eaten up with passion .
I do repent me that I put it to you .
You would be satisfied ?
Would ?
Nay , and I will .
And may , but how ?
How satisfied , my lord ?
Would you , the supervisor , grossly gape on , Behold her topped ?
Death and damnation !
Oh !
It were a tedious difficulty , I think , To bring them to that prospect .
What shall I say ?
Where's satisfaction ?
It is impossible you should see this , Were they as prime as goats , as hot as monkeys , As salt as wolves in pride , and fools as gross As ignorance made drunk .
But yet , I say , If imputation and strong circumstances Which lead directly to the door of truth Will give you satisfaction , you may have 't .
Give me a living reason she's disloyal .
I do not like the office .
But , sith I am entered in this cause so far , Pricked to 't by foolish honesty and love , I will go on .
I lay with Cassio lately And , being troubled with a raging tooth , I could not sleep .
Monstrous !
Nay , this was but his dream .
Tis a shrewd doubt , though it be but a dream .
And this may help to thicken other proofs That do demonstrate thinly .
I'll tear her all to pieces !
Tell me but this , Have you not sometimes seen a handkerchief Spotted with strawberries in your wife's hand ?
If it be that , If it be that , or any that was hers , It speaks against her with the other proofs .
Oh , that the slave had forty thousand lives !
One is too poor , too weak for my revenge .
Now do I see 'tis true .
Swell , bosom , with thy fraught , For 'tis of aspics ' tongues !
Patience , I say .
Your mind may change .
Never , Iago .
Now , by yon marble heaven , In the due reverence of a sacred vow I here engage my words .
Do not rise yet .
Witness , you ever-burning lights above , You elements that clip us round about , Witness that here Iago doth give up The execution of his wit , hands , heart , To wronged Othello's service .
Let him command , And to obey shall be in me remorse , What bloody business ever .
I greet thy love Not with vain thanks but with acceptance bounteous , And will upon the instant put thee to 't .
Within these three days let me hear thee say That Cassio's not alive .
But let her live .
Oh , damn her , damn her !
Come , go with me apart .
I will withdraw To furnish me with some swift means of death For the fair devil .
Now art thou my lieutenant .
I am your own for ever .
Pray you lead on .
At every house I'll call .
I will deserve your pains .
Why , man ?
Go to .
Where lodges he ?
To tell you where he lodges is to tell you where I lie .
Can anything be made of this ?
I know not where he lodges , and for me to devise a lodging and say he lies here , or he lies there , were to lie in mine own throat .
Can you inquire him out and be edified by report ?
Seek him , bid him come hither .
Tell him I have moved my lord on his behalf , and hope all will be well .
To do this is within the compass of man's wit , and therefore I will attempt the doing it .
Where should I lose that handkerchief , Emilia ?
I know not , madam .
Believe me , I had rather have lost my purse Full of crusadoes .
And but my noble Moor Is true of mind and made of no such baseness As jealous creatures are , it were enough To put him to ill thinking .
Is he not jealous ?
Who , he ?
I think the sun where he was born Drew all such humors from him .
Look where he comes .
I will not leave him now till Cassio Be called to him. , How is 't with you , my lord ?
Hot , hot , and moist .
This hand of yours requires A sequester from liberty , fasting , and prayer ,
Much castigation , exercise devout , For here's a young and sweating devil here , That commonly rebels .
Tis a good hand , A frank one .
The hearts of old gave hands , But our new heraldry is hands , not hearts .
I can not speak of this .
Come now , your promise .
What promise , chuck ?
I have sent to bid Cassio come speak with you .
I have a salt and sorry rheum offends me .
Lend me thy handkerchief .
Here , my lord .
That which I gave you .
I have it not about me .
Not ?
No , indeed , my lord .
That's a fault .
The thoughts of people .
She told her , while she kept it 'Twould make her amiable and subdue my father Entirely to her love , but if she lost it Or made gift of it , my father's eye Should hold her loathed and his spirits should hunt After new fancies .
She , dying , gave it me And bid me , when my fate would have me wived , To give it her .
I did so , and take heed on 't , Make it a darling like your precious eye .
Is 't possible ?
Tis true .
There's magic in the web of it .
A sibyl , that had numbered in the world The sun to course two hundred compasses , In her prophetic fury sewed the work .
The worms were hallowed that did breed the silk , And it was dyed in mummy which the skillful Conserved of maidens ' hearts .
Indeed ?
Is 't true ?
Most veritable , therefore look to 't well .
Then would to Heaven that I had never seen 't !
Ha !
Wherefore ?
Why do you speak so startingly and rash ?
Is 't lost ?
Is 't gone ?
Speak , is 't out o ' th ' way ?
Bless us !
Say you ?
It is not lost , but what and if it were ?
How !
I say , it is not lost .
Pray you , let Cassio be received again .
Fetch me the handkerchief , my mind misgives .
Come , come , You'll never meet a more sufficient man .
The handkerchief !
Away !
Is not this man jealous ?
I ne'er saw this before .
They are all but stomachs , and we all but food .
To eat us hungerly , and when they are full , They belch us .
Look you , Cassio and my husband !
There is no other way .
Tis she must do 't , And , lo , the happiness !
Go and importune her .
So shall I clothe me in a forced content , And shut myself up in some other course , To fortune's alms .
My lord is not my lord , nor should I know him Were he in favor as in humor altered .
So help me every spirit sanctified As I have spoken for you all my best And stood within the blank of his displeasure For my free speech .
You must awhile be patient .
What I can do I will , and more I will Than for myself I dare .
Let that suffice you .
Is my lord angry ?
Can he be angry ?
There's matter in 't indeed , if he be angry .
I prithee , do so .
Something , sure , of state , Either from Venice , or some unhatched practice Made demonstrable here in Cyprus to him , Hath puddled his clear spirit , and in such cases Men's natures wrangle with inferior things , Though great ones are their object .
Tis even so , For let our finger ache and it endues Our other healthful members even to that sense Of pain .
Nay , we must think men are not gods , Nor of them look for such observances As fit the bridal .
Pray heaven it be State matters , as you think , and no conception Nor no jealous toy concerning you .
Alas the day !
I never gave him cause .
But jealous souls will not be answered so .
They are not ever jealous for the cause , But jealous for they're jealous .
It is a monster Begot upon itself , born on itself .
Heaven keep the monster from Othello's mind !
Lady , amen .
I will go seek him. , Cassio , walk hereabout .
If I do find him fit , I'll move your suit And seek to effect it to my uttermost .
I humbly thank your ladyship .
Save you , friend Cassio !
What make you from home ?
How is 't with you , my most fair Bianca ?
Indeed , sweet love , I was coming to your house .
And I was going to your lodging , Cassio .
What , keep a week away ?
Seven days and nights ?
Eight score eight hours ?
And lovers ' absent hours More tedious than the dial eightscore times !
Oh weary reckoning !
O Cassio , whence came this ?
Is 't come to this ?
Well , well .
Go to , woman , Throw your vile guesses in the devil's teeth From whence you have them .
Why , whose is it ?
I like the work well .
Ere it be demanded , As like enough it will , I would have it copied .
Take it and do 't , and leave me for this time .
Leave you !
Wherefore ?
I do attend here on the general And think it no addition , nor my wish , To have him see me womaned .
Why , I pray you ?
Not that I love you not .
But that you do not love me .
I pray you bring me on the way a little And say if I shall see you soon at night .
Tis but a little way that I can bring you , For I attend here .
But I'll see you soon .
Tis very good .
I must be circumstanced .
Nine or ten times I had thought t ' have yerked him here under the ribs .
Tis better as it is .
Nay , but he prated And spoke such scurvy and provoking terms Against your honor That , with the little godliness I have , I did full hard forbear him .
Let him do his spite .
My services which I have done the signiory Shall out-tongue his complaints .
Will you think so ?
Think so , Iago ?
What , To kiss in private ?
An unauthorized kiss !
Or to be naked with her friend in bed An hour or more , not meaning any harm ?
Naked in bed , Iago , and not mean harm !
It is hypocrisy against the devil .
So they do nothing , 'tis a venial slip .
But if I give my wife a handkerchief , What then ?
She is protectress of her honor too .
May she give that ?
But for the handkerchief , By heaven , I would most gladly have forgot it .
Thou saidst , Oh , it comes o'er my memory , As doth the raven o'er the infectious house , Boding to all , he had my handkerchief .
Ay , what of that ?
That's not so good now .
What if I had said I had seen him do you wrong ?
He hath , my lord , but be you well assured No more than he'll unswear .
What hath he said ?
Why , that he did , I know not what he did .
Lie , With her ?
With her , on her , what you will .
Lie with her ?
lie on her ?
Lie with her , that's fulsome .
Handkerchief , confessions , handkerchief !
Noses , ears , and lips .
Is 't possible ?
Confess ! , Handkerchief ! , Oh , devil ! , Work on , My medicine , work !
How now , Cassio !
What's the matter ?
This is his second fit .
He had one yesterday .
Rub him about the temples .
No , forbear .
If not , he foams at mouth and by and by Breaks out to savage madness .
Look , he stirs .
Do you withdraw yourself a little while ,
When he is gone I would on great occasion speak with you .
How is it , general ?
Have you not hurt your head ?
Dost thou mock me ?
Would you would bear your fortune like a man !
A horned man's a monster and a beast .
Did he confess it ?
Good sir , be a man , Think every bearded fellow that's but yoked May draw with you .
Your case is better .
No , let me know , And knowing what I am , I know what she shall be .
Oh , thou art wise !
Tis certain .
Whilst you were here o'erwhelmed with your grief , A passion most resulting such a man , Cassio came hither .
I shifted him away And laid good 'scuses upon your ecstasy ,
Bade him anon return and here speak with me , The which he promised .
For I will make him tell the tale anew Where , how , how oft , how long ago , and when He hath , and is again to cope your wife .
I say , but mark his gesture .
Marry , patience , Or I shall say you are all in all in spleen , And nothing of a man .
Dost thou hear , Iago ?
Will you withdraw ?
Now will I question Cassio of Bianca , A huswife that by selling her desires Buys herself bread and clothes .
It is a creature That dotes on Cassio , as 'tis the strumpet's plague To beguile many and be beguiled by one .
He , when he hears of her , can not refrain From the excess of laughter .
As he shall smile , Othello shall go mad .
And his unbookish jealousy must construe Poor Cassio's smiles , gestures , and light behavior Quite in the wrong. , How do you now , lieutenant ?
Alas , poor caitiff !
Look how he laughs already !
I never knew woman love man so .
Alas , poor rogue , I think indeed she loves me .
Now he denies it faintly , and laughs it out .
Do you hear , Cassio ?
Now he importunes him To tell it o'er .
Go to , well said , well said .
She gives it out that you shall marry her .
Do you intend it ?
Ha , ha , ha !
Do you triumph ?
I marry her !
What ?
Prithee bear some charity to my wit .
Do not think it so unwholesome .
Ha , ha , ha !
So , so , so , so !
Prithee say true !
Well .
She is persuaded I will marry her , out of her own love and flattery , not out of my promise .
Iago beckons me .
Now he begins the story .
She was here even now .
She haunts me in every place .
I was the other day talking on the sea-bank with certain Venetians , and thither comes the bauble and , by this hand , she falls me thus about my neck , Crying "O dear Cassio ! " as it were .
Ha , ha , ha !
Now he tells how she plucked him to my chamber .
Look , where she comes .
Tis such another fitchew .
What did you mean by that same handkerchief you gave me even now ?
I was a fine fool to take it .
I must take out the work ?
A likely piece of work , that you should find it in your chamber , and not know who left it there !
This is some minx's token , and I must take out the work ?
How now , my sweet Bianca !
How now , how now ?
By heaven , that should be my handkerchief !
If you'll come to supper tonight , you may .
If you will not , come when you are next prepared for .
After her , after her .
I must , she'll rail in the street else .
Will you sup there ?
Yes , I intend so .
Did you perceive how he laughed at his vice ?
O Iago !
And did you see the handkerchief ?
Was that mine ?
Yours by this hand .
And to see how he prizes the foolish woman your wife !
She gave it him , and he hath given it his whore .
I would have him nine years a-killing .
A fine woman !
A fair woman !
A sweet woman !
Nay , you must forget that .
Ay , let her rot and perish and be damned tonight , for she shall not live .
Oh , the world hath not a sweeter creature , she might lie by an emperor's side and command him tasks .
Nay , that's not your way .
So delicate with her needle , an admirable musician .
Oh , she will sing the savageness out of a bear !
Of so high and plenteous wit and invention !
She's the worse for all this .
Oh , a thousand thousand times , and then of so gentle a condition !
Ay , too gentle .
Nay , that's certain .
O Iago , the pity of it , Iago !
If you are so fond over her iniquity , give her patent to offend , for if it touch not you it comes near nobody .
I will chop her into messes !
Oh , 'tis foul in her .
That's fouler .
Get me some poison , Iago , this night .
I'll not expostulate with her , lest her body and beauty unprovide my mind again , This night , Iago !
Do it not with poison .
Strangle her in her bed , even the bed she hath contaminated .
Good , good , the justice of it pleases !
Very good !
And for Cassio , let me be his undertaker .
You shall hear more by midnight .
Excellent good .
Those are the raised father and his friends .
You were best go in .
Not I , I must be found .
My parts , my title , and my perfect soul Shall manifest me rightly .
Is it they ?
By Janus , I think no .
The servants of the Duke and my lieutenant ?
The goodness of the night upon you , friends !
What is the news ?
The Duke does greet you , general , And he requires your haste-post-haste appearance , Even on the instant .
What's the matter , think you ?
Something from Cyprus as I may divine .
It is a business of some heat .
The galleys Have sent a dozen sequent messengers This very night at one another's heels , And many of the consuls , raised and met , Are at the Duke's already .
You have been hotly called for .
When being not at your lodging to be found The Senate hath sent about three several guests To search you out .
Tis well I am found by you .
I will but spend a word here in the house And go with you .
What trumpet is that same ?
I warrant something from Venice .
See , your wife's with him .
Save you , worthy general !
The duke and senators of Venice greet you .
And what's the news , good cousin Lodovico ?
I am very glad to see you , signior .
Welcome to Cyprus .
I thank you .
How does lieutenant Cassio ?
Lives , sir .
Are you sure of that ?
My lord ?
He did not call , he's busy in the paper .
Is there division 'twixt my lord and Cassio ?
A most unhappy one .
I would do much T ' atone them , for the love I bear to Cassio .
Fire and brimstone !
My lord ?
Are you wise ?
What , is he angry ?
Maybe the letter moved him , For , as I think , they do command him home , Deputing Cassio in his government .
Trust me , I am glad on 't .
Indeed !
My lord ?
I am glad to see you mad .
Why , sweet Othello , I have not deserved this .
My lord , this would not be believed in Venice , Though I should swear I saw 't .
Tis very much .
Make her amends , she weeps .
Oh , devil , devil !
Out of my sight !
I will not stay to offend you .
Truly , an obedient lady .
I do beseech your lordship , call her back .
Mistress !
My lord ?
What would you with her , sir ?
Who , I , my lord ?
Ay , you did wish that I would make her turn .
Sir , she can turn , and turn , and yet go on , And turn again .
And she can weep , sir , weep .
And she's obedient , as you say , obedient , Very obedient. , Proceed you in your tears. , Concerning this , sir , Oh , well-painted passion ! , I am commanded home. , Get you away , I'll send for you anon. , Sir , I obey the mandate And will return to Venice. , Hence , avaunt !
Cassio shall have my place .
And , sir , tonight I do entreat that we may sup together .
You are welcome , sir , to Cyprus .
Goats and monkeys !
Is this the noble Moor whom our full senate Call all in all sufficient ?
He is much changed .
Are his wits safe ?
Is he not light of brain ?
He's that he is .
I may not breathe my censure What he might be .
If what he might he is not , I would to heaven he were !
Strike his wife ?
Faith , that was not so well .
Yet would I knew That stroke would prove the worst !
Is it his use ?
Or did the letters work upon his blood And new-create his fault ?
Alas , alas !
It is not honesty in me to speak What I have seen and known .
Do but go after And mark how he continues .
I am sorry that I am deceived in him .
You have seen nothing then ?
Nor ever heard , nor ever did suspect .
Yes , you have seen Cassio and she together .
But then I saw no harm , and then I heard Each syllable that breath made up between them .
What , did they never whisper ?
Never , my lord .
Nor send you out o ' th ' way ?
Never .
To fetch her fan , her gloves , her mask , nor nothing ?
Never , my lord .
That's strange .
I durst , my lord , to wager she is honest , Lay down my soul at stake .
Bid her come hither .
Go .
She says enough , yet she's a simple bawd That can not say as much .
And yet she'll kneel and pray , I have seen her do 't .
My lord , what is your will ?
Pray , chuck , come hither .
What is your pleasure ?
Let me see your eyes .
Look in my face .
What horrible fancy's this ?
I understand a fury in your words , But not the words .
Therefore be double damned , Swear thou art honest !
Heaven doth truly know it .
Heaven truly knows that thou art false as hell .
To whom , my lord ?
With whom ?
How am I false ?
Ah , Desdemona , away , away , away !
Am I the motive of these tears , my lord ?
If haply you my father do suspect An instrument of this your calling back , Lay not your blame on me .
If you have lost him , Why , I have lost him too .
Yet could I bear that too , well , very well .
But there where I have garnered up my heart , Where either I must live or bear no life , The fountain from the which my current runs Or else dries up , to be discarded thence !
Or keep it as a cistern for foul toads To knot and gender in !
Turn thy complexion there , Patience , thou young and rose-lipped cherubin , , Ay , there , look grim as hell !
I hope my noble lord esteems me honest .
Oh , ay , as summer flies are in the shambles , That quicken even with blowing .
O thou weed , Who art so lovely fair and smell'st so sweet That the sense aches at thee , would thou hadst ne'er been born !
Alas , what ignorant sin have I committed ?
Was this fair paper , this most goodly book , Made to write "whore" upon ?
What committed ?
Committed ?
O thou public commoner !
What committed ?
Impudent strumpet !
By heaven , you do me wrong !
Are you not a strumpet ?
No , as I am a Christian .
What , not a whore ?
No , as I shall be saved .
Is 't possible ?
Oh , heaven forgive us !
I cry you mercy , then , I took you for that cunning whore of Venice That married with Othello. , You , mistress , That have the office opposite to Saint Peter And keep the gate of hell !
You , you , ay , you !
We have done our course .
There's money for your pains .
I pray you , turn the key and keep our counsel .
Alas , what does this gentleman conceive ?
How do you , madam ?
Ancient , what makes he here ?
Faith , he tonight hath boarded a land carrack .
If it prove lawful prize , he's made for ever .
I do not understand .
He's married .
To who ?
Here comes another troop to seek for you .
It is Brabantio .
General , be advised , He comes to bad intent .
Holla !
Stand there !
Signior , it is the Moor .
Down with him , thief !
With who ?
I have none .
Do not talk to me , Emilia .
Here's a change indeed !
Tis meet I should be used so , very meet .
How have I been behaved that he might stick The small'st opinion on my least misuse ?
What is your pleasure , madam ?
How is 't with you ?
I can not tell .
Those that do teach young babes Do it with gentle means and easy tasks .
He might have chid me so , for , in good faith , I am a child to chiding .
What is the matter , lady ?
Alas , Iago , my lord hath so bewhored her , Thrown such despite and heavy terms upon her , That true hearts can not bear it .
Am I that name , Iago ?
What name , fair lady ?
Such as she says my lord did say I was .
Why did he so ?
I do not know .
I am sure I am none such .
Do not weep , do not weep .
Alas the day !
Hath she forsook so many noble matches , Her father and her country , and her friends , To be called "whore" ?
Would it not make one weep ?
It is my wretched fortune .
Beshrew him for 't !
How comes this trick upon him ?
Nay , heaven doth know .
I will be hanged , if some eternal villain , Some busy and insinuating rogue , Some cogging , cozening slave , to get some office , Have not devised this slander .
I will be hanged else !
Fie , there is no such man .
It is impossible .
If any such there be , heaven pardon him !
Why should he call her "whore" ?
Who keeps her company ?
The Moor's abused by some most villainous knave , Some base notorious knave , some scurvy fellow .
O heavens , that such companions thou'dst unfold , And put in every honest hand a whip To lash the rascals naked through the world Even from the east to th ' west !
Speak within door .
Oh , fie upon them !
Some such squire he was That turned your wit the seamy side without And made you to suspect me with the Moor .
You are a fool .
Go to .
Alas Iago , What shall I do to win my lord again ?
Good friend , go to him .
For , by this light of heaven , I know not how I lost him .
Here I kneel : If e'er my will did trespass 'gainst his love , Either in discourse of thought or actual deed , Or that mine eyes , mine ears , or any sense , Delighted them , or any other form , Or that I do not yet , and ever did ,
And ever will , though he do shake me off To beggarly divorcement , love him dearly , Comfort forswear me !
Unkindness may do much , And his unkindness may defeat my life , But never taint my love .
I can not say "whore , " It does abhor me now I speak the word .
The business of the state does him offence , And he does chide with you .
If 'twere no other , 'T is but so , I warrant .
Hark , how these instruments summon to supper .
The messengers of Venice stays the meat .
Go in , and weep not .
All things shall be well .
How now , Roderigo !
I do not find that thou deal'st justly with me .
What in the contrary ?
I will indeed no longer endure it , nor am I yet persuaded to put up in peace what already I have foolishly suffered .
Will you hear me , Roderigo ?
I have heard too much , and your words and performances are no kin together .
You charge me most unjustly .
With naught but truth .
The jewels you have had from me to deliver Desdemona would half have corrupted a votaress .
You have told me she hath received them and returned me expectations and comforts of sudden respect and acquaintance , but I find none .
Well , go to .
Very well .
Very well , " "go to" !
I can not go to , man , nor 'tis not very well .
Nay , I think it is scurvy , and begin to find myself fopped in it .
Very well .
I tell you 'tis not very well .
I will make myself known to Desdemona .
If she will return me my jewels I will give over my suit and repent my unlawful solicitation .
If not , assure yourself I will seek satisfaction of you .
You have said now .
Ay , and said nothing but what I protest intendment of doing .
Why , now I see there's mettle in thee , and even from this instant to build on thee a better opinion than ever before .
Give me thy hand , Roderigo .
Thou hast taken against me a most just exception , but yet I protest I have dealt most directly in thy affair .
It hath not appeared .
I grant indeed it hath not appeared , and your suspicion is not without wit and judgment .
But , Roderigo , if thou hast that in thee indeed , which I have greater reason to believe now than ever , I mean purpose , courage and valor , this night show it .
If thou the next night following enjoy not Desdemona , take me from this world with treachery and devise engines for my life .
Well , what is it ?
Is it within reason and compass ?
Sir , there is especial commission come from Venice to depute Cassio in Othello's place .
Is that true ?
Why , then Othello and Desdemona return again to Venice .
How do you mean , removing of him ?
Why , by making him uncapable of Othello's place : knocking out his brains .
And that you would have me to do !
Ay , if you dare do yourself a profit and a right .
He sups tonight with a harlotry , and thither will I go to him .
He knows not yet of his honorable fortune .
If you will watch his going thence ( which I will fashion to fall out between twelve and one ) you may take him at your pleasure .
I will be near to second your attempt , and he shall fall between us .
I will show you such a necessity in his death that you shall think yourself bound to put it on him .
It is now high suppertime , and the night grows to waste .
About it !
I will hear further reason for this .
And you shall be satisfied .
I do beseech you , sir , trouble yourself no further .
Madam , good night .
I humbly thank your ladyship .
Your honor is most welcome .
Will you walk , sir ? , O Desdemona , My lord ?
Get you to bed on th ' instant , I will be returned Forthwith .
Dismiss your attendant there , look 't be done .
I will , my lord .
How goes it now ?
He looks gentler than he did .
Dismiss me ?
It was his bidding .
Therefore , good Emilia , Give me my nightly wearing , and adieu .
We must not now displease him .
Ay .
Would you had never seen him !
So would not I .
My love doth so approve him That even his stubbornness , his checks , his frowns , Prithee , unpin me , have grace and favor .
I have laid those sheets you bade me on the bed .
All's one .
Good Father , how foolish are our minds !
If I do die before thee , prithee , shroud me In one of these same sheets .
Come , come !
You talk !
She had a song of "Willow , " An old thing 'twas , but it expressed her fortune And she died singing it .
That song tonight Will not go from my mind .
I have much to do But to go hang my head all at one side And sing it like poor Barbary .
Prithee , dispatch .
Shall I go fetch your nightgown ?
No , unpin me here .
This Lodovico is a proper man .
A very handsome man .
He speaks well .
I know a lady in Venice would have walked barefoot to Palestine for a touch of his nether lip .
It's the wind .
Mine eyes do itch , Doth that bode weeping ?
Tis neither here nor there .
I have heard it said so .
Oh , these men , these men !
Dost thou in conscience think , tell me , Emilia , That there be women do abuse their husbands In such gross kind ?
There be some such , no question .
You , Roderigo !
Come , sir , I am for you .
Good signior , you shall more command with years Than with your weapons .
O thou foul thief , where hast thou stowed my daughter ?
Damned as thou art , thou hast enchanted her !
Judge me the world if 'tis not gross in sense That thou hast practiced on her with foul charms , Abused her delicate youth with drugs or minerals That weakens motion .
If he do resist , Subdue him at his peril !
Whither will you that I go To answer this your charge ?
Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world ?
Why , would not you ?
No , by this heavenly light !
Nor I neither , by this heavenly light .
I might do 't as well i ' th ' dark .
Wouldst thou do such a deed for all the world ?
The world's a huge thing .
It is a great price for a small vice .
In troth , I think thou wouldst not .
In troth , I think I should , and undo 't when I had done .
Marry , I would not do such a thing for a joint-ring , nor for measures of lawn , nor for gowns , petticoats , nor caps , nor any petty exhibition .
But for the whole world ?
Why , who would not make her husband a cuckold to make him a monarch ?
I should venture purgatory for 't .
Beshrew me , if I would do such a wrong For the whole world .
Why the wrong is but a wrong i ' th ' world , and having the world for your labor , 'tis a wrong in your own world , and you might quickly make it right .
I do not think there is any such woman .
Yes , a dozen , and as many to th ' vantage as would store the world they played for .
But I do think it is their husbands ' faults If wives do fall .
Say that they slack their duties
Why , we have galls , and though we have some grace , Yet have we some revenge .
Let husbands know Their wives have sense like them .
They see and smell And have their palates both for sweet and sour , As husbands have .
I think it is .
And doth affection breed it ?
I think it doth .
Is 't frailty that thus errs ?
It is so too .
And have not we affections , Desires for sport , and frailty , as men have ?
Then let them use us well , else let them know , The ills we do , their ills instruct us so .
Good night , good night .
Heaven me such uses send , Not to pick bad from bad , but by bad mend !
Here , stand behind this bulk , straight will he come .
Quick , quick !
Fear nothing .
I'll be at thy elbow .
It makes us , or it mars us .
Here , at thy hand .
Be bold , and take thy stand .
I have no great devotion to the deed And yet he hath given me satisfying reasons .
Tis but a man gone .
I know his gait , 'tis he. , Villain , thou diest !
Oh , I am slain !
I am maimed for ever .
Help , ho !
Murder !
Murder !
The voice of Cassio .
Iago keeps his word .
Oh , villain that I am !
It is even so .
Oh , help , ho !
Light !
A surgeon !
Tis he .
Oh , brave Iago , honest and just , That hast such noble sense of thy friend's wrong !
Thou teachest me .
Minion , your dear lies dead , And your unblest fate hies .
Strumpet , I come .
For , of my heart , those charms , thine eyes , are blotted .
Thy bed , lust-stained , shall with lust's blood be spotted .
What , ho !
No watch ?
No passage ?
Murder !
Murder !
Tis some mischance , the cry is very direful .
Oh , help !
Hark !
Oh , wretched villain !
Two or three groan .
Tis heavy night , These may be counterfeits .
Let's think 't unsafe To come in to the cry without more help .
Nobody come ?
Then shall I bleed to death .
Hark !
Here's one comes in his shirt , with light and weapons .
Who's there ?
Whose noise is this that ones on murder ?
We do not know .
Do not you hear a cry ?
Here , here !
For heaven's sake , help me !
The same indeed , a very valiant fellow .
Iago ?
Oh , I am spoiled , undone by villains !
Give me some help .
Oh , me , lieutenant !
What villains have done this ?
I think that one of them is hereabout , And can not make away .
That's one of them .
O damned Iago !
O inhuman dog !
Kill men i ' th ' dark !
Where be these bloody thieves ?
Are you of good or evil ?
As you shall prove us , praise us .
Signior Lodovico ?
He , sir .
I cry you mercy .
Here's Cassio hurt by villains .
Cassio !
How is 't , brother !
My leg is cut in two .
Marry , heaven forbid !
Light , gentlemen , I'll bind it with my shirt .
What is the matter , ho ?
Who is 't that cried ?
Who is 't that cried ?
Oh , my dear Cassio !
My sweet Cassio !
O Cassio , Cassio , Cassio !
O notable strumpet !
Cassio , may you suspect Who they should be that have thus mangled you ?
No .
I am sorry to find you thus .
I have been to seek you .
Alas , he faints !
O Cassio , Cassio , Cassio !
Gentlemen all , I do suspect this trash To be a party in this injury. , Patience awhile , good Cassio. , Come , come , Lend me a light .
Know we this face or no ?
Even he , sir .
Did you know him ?
Know him ?
Ay .
I am glad to see you .
How do you , Cassio ? , Oh , a chair , a chair !
Roderigo !
He , he , 'tis he .
Oh , that's well said , the chair !
Some good man bear him carefully from hence .
I'll fetch the general's surgeon. , Save you your labor. , He that lies slain here , Cassio , Was my dear friend .
What malice was between you ?
None in the world , nor do I know the man .
I pray you , look upon her .
Do you see , gentlemen ?
Nay , guiltiness Will speak , though tongues were out of use .
Alas , what is the matter ?
What is the matter , husband ?
Cassio hath here been set on in the dark By Roderigo and fellows that are 'scaped .
He's almost slain , and Roderigo dead .
Alas , good gentleman !
Alas , good Cassio !
This is the fruits of whoring .
Prithee , Emilia , Go know of Cassio where he supped tonight. ,
He supped at my house , but I therefore shake not .
Oh , did he so ?
I charge you , go with me .
Oh , fie upon thee , strumpet !
As I !
Fie upon thee !
Kind gentlemen , let's go see poor Cassio dressed. , Come , mistress , you must tell 's another tale .
Emilia , run you to the citadel And tell my lord and lady what hath happed. , Will you go on afore ?
This is the night That either makes me or fordoes me quite .
How may the Duke be therewith satisfied , Whose messengers are here about my side Upon some present business of the state To bring me to him ?
Tis true , most worthy signior .
The Duke's in council and your noble self , I am sure , is sent for .
The Duke in council ?
In this time of the night ?
Bring him away .
Mine's not an idle cause .
The Duke himself , Or any of my brothers of the state , Can not but feel this wrong as 'twere their own .
For if such actions may have passage free , Bond-slaves and pagans shall our statesmen be .
Let me not name it to you , you chaste stars , It is the cause .
Yet I'll not shed her blood , Nor scar that whiter skin of hers than snow And smooth as monumental alabaster .
Yet she must die , else she'll betray more men .
Put out the light , and then put out the light .
If I quench thee , thou flaming minister , I can again thy former light restore Should I repent me .
When I have plucked thy rose I can not give it vital growth again , It must needs wither .
Who's there ?
Othello ?
Ay , Desdemona .
Will you come to bed , my lord ?
Ay , my lord .
Alack , my lord , what do you mean by that ?
Well , do it , and be brief .
I will walk by .
I would not kill thy unprepared spirit .
No , heavens forfend , I would not kill thy soul !
Talk you of killing ?
Ay , I do .
Then heaven Have mercy on me !
Amen , with all my heart .
If you say , I hope you will not kill me .
Humh !
Why I should fear I know not , Since guiltiness I know not .
But yet I feel I fear .
Think on thy sins .
They are loves I bear to you .
Ay , and for that thou diest .
That death's unnatural that kills for loving .
Alas , why gnaw you so your nether lip ?
Some bloody passion shakes your very frame .
These are portents , but yet I hope , I hope They do not point on me .
I will so .
What's the matter ?
That handkerchief Which I so loved and gave thee , thou gav'st To Cassio .
No , by my life and soul !
Send for the man and ask him .
Thou art on thy deathbed .
Ay , but not yet to die !
Presently .
Therefore confess thee freely of thy sin , For to deny each article with oath Can not remove nor choke the strong conception That I do groan withal .
Thou art to die .
Oh , heaven have mercy on me !
I say "amen."
And have you mercy too !
I never gave him token .
By heaven , I saw my handkerchief in 's hand .
O perjured woman , thou dost stone my heart , And mak'st me call what I intend to do A murder , which I thought a sacrifice !
I saw the handkerchief .
He hath confessed .
What , my lord ?
That he hath used thee .
How ?
Ay .
He will not say so .
No , his mouth is stopped .
Honest Iago Hath ta'en order for 't .
What , is he dead ?
Had all his hairs been lives My great revenge had stomach for them all .
Alas , he is betrayed and I undone .
Oh , banish me , my lord , but kill me not !
Kill me tomorrow , let me live tonight !
Nay , if you strive , But half an hour !
But while I say one prayer !
It is too late .
What noise is this ? , Not dead ?
Not yet quite dead ?
Who's there ?
Yes , 'tis Emilia. , 'T is like she comes to speak of Cassio's death , The noise was high .
What's the matter with thee now ?
But now , my lord .
Cassio , my lord , hath killed a young Venetian Called Roderigo .
Roderigo killed ?
And Cassio killed !
No , Cassio is not killed .
Not Cassio killed !
Then murder's out of tune , And sweet revenge grows harsh .
Oh , falsely , falsely murdered !
Alas , what cry is that ?
That ?
What ?
Out and alas , that was my lady's voice .
Help !
Help , ho , help !
O lady , speak again !
Sweet Desdemona !
O sweet mistress , speak !
A guiltless death I die .
Oh , who hath done this deed ?
Nobody .
I myself .
Commend me to my kind lord .
Oh , farewell !
Why , how should she be murdered ?
Alas , who knows ?
You heard her say herself it was not I .
She said so .
I must needs report the truth .
She's like a liar gone to burning hell .
Twas I that killed her .
Oh , the more angel she , And you the blacker devil !
She turned to folly , and she was a whore .
Thou dost belie her , and thou art a devil .
She was false as water .
Oh , she was heavenly true !
Cassio did top her , ask thy husband else .
Oh , I were damned beneath all depth in hell , But that I did proceed upon just grounds To this extremity .
Thy husband knew it all .
My husband !
Thy husband .
That she was false to wedlock ?
Ay , with Cassio .
Had she been true , If heaven would make me such another world Of one entire and perfect chrysolite , I'd not have sold her for it .
My husband ?
Ay , 'twas he that told me on her first .
An honest man he is , and hates the slime That sticks on filthy deeds .
My husband !
What needs this iterance , woman ?
I say thy husband .
O mistress , villainy hath made mocks with love !
My husband say that she was false !
He , woman .
I say "thy husband" , dost understand the word ?
My friend , thy husband , honest , honest Iago .
If he say so , may his pernicious soul Rot half a grain a day !
He lies to th ' heart .
She was too fond of her most filthy bargain .
Ha !
Do thy worst .
This deed of thine is no more worthy heaven Than thou wast worthy her .
Peace , you were best .
O gull !
O dolt !
As ignorant as dirt !
Thou hast done a deed , I care not for thy sword , I'll make thee known
The Moor hath killed my mistress !
Murder , murder !
What is the matter ?
How now , general ?
Oh , are you come , Iago ?
You have done well , That men must lay their murders on your neck .
What is the matter ?
I told him what I thought , and told no more Than what he found himself was apt and true .
But did you ever tell him she was false ?
I did .
You told a lie , an odious , damned lie .
Upon my soul , a lie , a wicked lie .
She false with Cassio !
Did you say with Cassio ?
With Cassio , mistress .
Go to , charm your tongue .
My mistress here lies murdered in her bed , Oh , heavens forfend !
There's no composition in this news That gives them credit .
Indeed , they are disproportioned .
My letters say a hundred and seven galleys .
And mine a hundred and forty .
And mine , two hundred .
But though they jump not on a just account , As in these cases , where the aim reports 'T is oft with difference , yet do they all confirm A Turkish fleet , and bearing up to Cyprus .
Nay , it is possible enough to judgment .
A messenger from the galleys .
And your reports have set the murder on .
I thought so then , I'll kill myself for grief .
Oh , villainy , villainy !
What , are you mad ?
I charge you , get you home .
Good gentlemen , let me have leave to speak .
Tis proper I obey him , but not now .
Perchance , Iago , I will ne'er go home .
Oh !
Oh !
Oh !
Nay , lay thee down and roar , For thou hast killed the sweetest innocent That e'er did lift up eye .
Oh , she was foul ! , I scarce did know you , uncle .
I am glad thy father's dead , Thy match was mortal to him , and pure grief Shore his old thread in twain .
Did he live now ,
This sight would make him do a desperate turn , Yea , curse his better angel from his side And fall to reprobation .
Tis pitiful , but yet Iago knows That she with Cassio hath the act of shame A thousand times committed .
Zounds , hold your peace .
Let heaven and men and devils , let them all , All , all cry shame against me , yet I'll speak .
Be wise , and get you home .
I will not .
Fie !
Your sword upon a woman ?
O thou dull Moor !
That handkerchief thou speak'st of I found by fortune and did give my husband .
For often , with a solemn earnestness , More than indeed belonged to such a trifle , He begged of me to steal it .
Villainous whore !
She give it Cassio ?
No , alas , I found it And I did give 't my husband .
Filth , thou liest !
By heaven , I do not , I do not , gentlemen. , O murderous coxcomb !
Are there no stones in heaven But what serve for the thunder ? , Precious villain !
Sure he hath killed his wife .
Ay , ay .
Oh , lay me by my mistress ' side .
He's gone , but his wife's killed .
Let him not pass , But kill him rather .
But why should honor outlive honesty ?
Let it go all .
What did thy song bode , lady ?
Hark , canst thou hear me ?
I will play the swan .
And die in music .
Oh , here it is .
Uncle , I must come forth .
Look in upon me then and speak with me , Or , naked as I am , I will assault thee .
What is the matter ?
Behold , I have a weapon .
That with this little arm and this good sword I have made my way through more impediments Than twenty times your stop .
But , oh , vain boast !
Who can control his fate ?
tis not so now .
Be not afraid , though you do see me weaponed .
Here is my journey's end , here is my butt , And very sea-mark of my utmost sail .
Do you go back dismayed ?
tis a lost fear .
Where should Othello go ? , Now , how dost thou look now ?
O ill-starred wench , Pale as thy smock !
When we shall meet at compt This look of thine will hurl my soul from heaven And fiends will snatch at it .
Cold , cold , my girl , Even like thy chastity .
O cursed , cursed slave !
Whip me , ye devils , From the possession of this heavenly sight !
Where is this rash and most unfortunate man ?
That's he that was Othello .
Here I am .
Where is that viper ?
Bring the villain forth .
I take it much unkindly That thou , Iago , who hast had my purse As if the strings were thine , shouldst know of this .
Sblood , but you'll not hear me !
Thou told'st me Thou didst hold him in thy hate .
Despise me If I do not .
I look down towards his feet , but that's a fable .
If that thou be'st a devil , I can not kill thee .
Wrench his sword from him .
I bleed , sir , but not killed .
I am not sorry neither .
I'd have thee live , For in my sense 'tis happiness to die .
Why , anything .
This wretch hath part confessed his villainy .
Did you and he consent in Cassio's death ?
Ay .
Dear general , I never gave you cause .
I do believe it , and I ask your pardon .
Will you , I pray , demand that demi-devil Why he hath thus ensnared my soul and body ?
Demand me nothing .
What you know , you know .
From this time forth I never will speak word .
What , not to pray ?
Well , thou dost best .
The one of them imports The death of Cassio to be undertook By Roderigo .
Oh , villain !
Most heathenish and most gross !
O thou pernicious caitiff !
How came you , Cassio , by that handkerchief That was my wife's ?
I found it in my chamber , And he himself confessed but even now That there he dropped it for a special purpose Which wrought to his desire .
Your power and your command is taken off And Cassio rules in Cyprus .
For this slave , If there be any cunning cruelty That can torment him much and hold him long , It shall be his .
You shall close prisoner rest Till that the nature of your fault be known To the Venetian state. , Come , bring him away .
Nothing extenuate , Nor set down aught in malice .
Then must you speak Of one that loved not wisely , but too well .
Of one not easily jealous , but being wrought , Perplexed in the extreme .
Of one whose hand , Like the base Indian , threw a pearl away Richer than all his tribe .
Set you down this ,
And say besides that in Aleppo once , Where a malignant and a turbaned Turk Beat a Venetian and traduced the state , I took by the throat the circumcised dog , And smote him , thus .
Oh , bloody period !
All that is spoke is marred .
This did I fear , but thought he had no weapon , For he was great of heart .
How say you by this change ?
This can not be , By no assay of reason .
Tis a pageant , To keep us in false gaze .
Here is more news .
Ay , so I thought .
How many , as you guess ?
Of thirty sail .
And now they do re-stem Their backward course , bearing with frank appearance Their purposes toward Cyprus .
Signior Montano , Your trusty and most valiant servitor , With his free duty recommends you thus , And prays you to believe him .
Tis certain then for Cyprus .
Marcus Luccicos , is not he in town ?
He's now in Florence .
Write from us to him .
Post-post-haste , dispatch .
Here comes Brabantio and the valiant Moor .
Good your grace , pardon me .
Why , what's the matter ?
My daughter !
Oh , my daughter !
Dead ?
Ay , to me .
Whoe'er he be that in this foul proceeding Hath thus beguiled your daughter of herself And you of her , the bloody book of law You shall yourself read in the bitter letter , After your own sense , yea , though our proper son Stood in your action .
Humbly I thank your grace .
We are very sorry for't .
Nothing , but this is so .
The very head and front of my offending Hath this extent , no more .
More than pertains to feats of broils and battle , And therefore little shall I grace my cause In speaking for myself .
A maiden never bold , Of spirit so still and quiet that her motion Blushed at herself .
Against all rules of nature , and must be driven To find out practices of cunning hell Why this should be .
I therefore vouch again That with some mixtures powerful o'er the blood Or with some dram , conjured to this effect , He wrought upon her .
But , Othello , speak .
Or came it by request and such fair question As soul to soul affordeth ?
And let her speak of me before her father .
Fetch Desdemona hither .
You best know the place .
And till she come , as truly as to heaven I do confess the vices of my blood So justly to your grave ears I'll present How I did thrive in this fair lady's love And she in mine .
Say it , Othello .
Her father loved me , oft invited me , Still questioned me the story of my life From year to year , the battles , sieges , fortunes , That I have passed .
These things to hear Would Desdemona seriously incline .
She wished she had not heard it , yet she wished That heaven had made her such a man .
She thanked me And bade me , if I had a friend that loved her , I should but teach him how to tell my story And that would woo her .
Upon this hint I spake .
She loved me for the dangers I had passed , And I loved her that she did pity them .
This only is the witchcraft I have used .
Here comes the lady .
Let her witness it .
I think this tale would win my daughter too .
I pray you , hear her speak .
If she confess that she was half the wooer , Destruction on my head if my bad blame Light on the man. , Come hither , gentle mistress .
Do you perceive in all this noble company Where most you owe obedience ?
My noble father , I do perceive here a divided duty .
To you I am bound for life and education .
You are the lord of duty .
I am hitherto your daughter .
I have done .
Please it your grace , on to the state affairs .
I had rather to adopt a child than get it. , Come hither , Moor .
I here do give thee that with all my heart Which , but thou hast already , with all my heart I would keep from thee .
For thy escape would teach me tyranny , To hang clogs on them. , I have done , my lord .
Let me speak like yourself and lay a sentence Which , as a grise or step , may help these lovers .
I humbly beseech you , proceed to th ' affairs of state .
The Turk with a most mighty preparation makes for Cyprus .
Why , at her father's .
I'll not have it so .
Nor I .
Most gracious Duke , To my unfolding lend your prosperous ear And let me find a charter in your voice , T ' assist my simpleness .
What would you , Desdemona ?
That I did love the Moor to live with him , My downright violence and storm of fortunes May trumpet to the world .
I saw Othello's visage in his mind , And to his honors and his valiant parts Did I my soul and fortunes consecrate .
Let me go with him .
Let her have your voice .
Be it as you shall privately determine , Either for her stay or going .
Th ' affair cries haste And speed must answer it .
You must away tonight .
With all my heart .
At nine i ' th ' morning here we'll meet again .
Othello , leave some officer behind And he shall our commission bring to you , And such things else of quality and respect As doth import you .
To his conveyance I assign my wife , With what else needful your good grace shall think To be sent after me .
Wherein the toged consuls can propose As masterly as he .
Mere prattle without practice Is all his soldiership .
Why , there's no remedy .
Tis the curse of service .
Now sir , be judge yourself , Whether I in any just term am affined To love the Moor .
I would not follow him then .
O sir , content you .
I follow him to serve my turn upon him .
We can not all be masters , nor all masters Can not be truly followed .
You shall mark Many a duteous and knee-crooking knave That ( doting on his own obsequious bondage ) Wears out his time much like his master's ass For naught but provender , and when he's old , cashiered .
Whip me such honest knaves .
These fellows have some soul ,
Let it be so .
Use Desdemona well .
Look to her , Moor , if thou hast eyes to see .
She has deceived her father , and may thee .
My life upon her faith ! , Honest Iago , My Desdemona must I leave to thee .
I prithee , let thy wife attend on her , And bring them after in the best advantage .
Come , Desdemona , I have but an hour Of love , of worldly matter and direction , To spend with thee .
We must obey the time .
Iago .
What say'st thou , noble heart ?
What will I do , think'st thou ?
Why , go to bed , and sleep .
I will incontinently drown myself .
If thou dost I shall never love thee after .
Why , thou silly gentleman !
Oh , villainous !
I have looked upon the world for four times seven years , and since I could distinguish betwixt a benefit and an injury I never found man that knew how to love himself .
Ere I would say I would drown myself for the love of a guinea hen , I would change my humanity with a baboon .
What should I do ?
I confess it is my shame to be so fond , but it is not in my virtue to amend it .
Virtue ?
A fig !
Tis in ourselves that we are thus or thus .
Our bodies are our gardens , to the which our wills are gardeners .
So that if we will plant nettles or sow lettuce , set hyssop and weed up thyme , supply it with one gender of herbs or distract it with many , either to have it sterile with idleness , or manured with industry , why , the power and corrigible authority of this lies in our wills .
If the balance of our lives had not one scale of reason to poise another of sensuality , the blood and baseness of our natures would conduct us to most prepost'rous conclusions .
But we have reason to cool our raging motions , our carnal stings , our unbitted lusts .
It can not be .
It is merely a lust of the blood and a permission of the will .
Come , be a man .
Drown thyself ?
Drown cats and blind puppies !
I have professed me thy friend , and I confess me knit to thy deserving with cables of perdurable toughness .
I could never better stead thee than now .
Put money in thy purse .
These Moors are changeable in their wills , fill thy purse with money .
The food that to him now is as luscious as locusts shall be to him shortly as bitter as coloquintida .
She must change for youth .
Therefore , put money in thy purse .
If thou wilt needs damn thyself , do it a more delicate way than drowning .
Make all the money thou canst .
If sanctimony and a frail vow betwixt an erring barbarian and supersubtle Venetian be not too hard for my wits and all the tribe of hell , thou shalt enjoy her .
A pox of drowning thyself !
Tis clean out of the way .
Thou art sure of me .
Go , make money .
I have told thee often , and I re-tell thee again and again , I hate the Moor .
Let us be conjunctive in our revenge against him .
Traverse , go , provide thy money .
We will have more of this tomorrow .
Adieu .
Where shall we meet i ' th ' morning ?
At my lodging .
I'll be with thee betimes .
No more of drowning , do you hear ?
I am changed .
Go to , farewell .
Put money enough in your purse .
I'll sell all my land .
Thus do I ever make my fool my purse .
For I mine own gained knowledge should profane If I would time expend with such a snipe But for my sport and profit .
I hate the Moor , And it is thought abroad that 'twixt my sheets He's done my office .
I know not if 't be true , But I , for mere suspicion in that kind , Will do as if for surety .
He holds me well .
Cassio's a proper man .
Let me see now ,
To get his place and to plume up my will In double knavery .
How ?
How ?
Let's see .
I have 't .
What from the cape can you discern at sea ?
Nothing at all .
It is a high-wrought flood .
Methinks the wind hath spoke aloud at land , A fuller blast ne'er shook our battlements .
What shall we hear of this ?
A segregation of the Turkish fleet .
For do but stand upon the foaming shore , The chidden billow seems to pelt the clouds , The wind-shaked surge , with high and monstrous mane , Seems to cast water on the burning bear , And quench the guards of th ' ever-fixed pole .
I never did like molestation view On the enchafed flood .
If that the Turkish fleet Be not ensheltered and embayed , they are drowned .
It is impossible they bear it out .
News , lads , Our wars are done !
The desperate tempest hath so banged the Turks , That their designment halts .
A noble ship of Venice Hath seen a grievous wreck and sufferance On most part of their fleet .
How ?
Is this true ?
Michael Cassio , Lieutenant to the warlike Moor Othello , Is come on shore .
The Moor himself at sea And is in full commission here for Cyprus .
I am glad on 't .
Tis a worthy governor .
For they were parted With foul and violent tempest .
Pray heavens he be , For I have served him , and the man commands Like a full soldier .
Come , let's do so .
For every minute is expectancy Of more arrivance .
Thanks , you the valiant of this warlike isle That so approve the Moor .
Oh , let the heavens Give him defense against the elements , For I have lost him on a dangerous sea .
Is he well shipped ?
His bark is stoutly timbered and his pilot Of very expert and approved allowance Therefore my hopes , not surfeited to death , Stand in bold cure .
What noise ?
I pray you sir , go forth And give us truth who 'tis that is arrived .
I shall .
But good lieutenant , is your general wived ?
Tis one Iago , ancient to the general .
What is she ?
Oh , behold , The riches of the ship is come on shore !
You men of Cyprus , let her have your knees .
Hail to thee , lady , and the grace of heaven , Before , behind thee , and on every hand , Enwheel thee round !
I thank you , valiant Cassio .
What tidings can you tell me of my lord ?
He is not yet arrived .
Nor know I aught But that he's well and will be shortly here .
Oh , but I fear .
How lost you company ?
The great contention of the sea and skies Parted our fellowship , But , hark !
See for the news .
For , sir , It is as sure as you are Roderigo , Were I the Moor , I would not be Iago .
I am not what I am .
Do , with like timorous accent and dire yell As when , by night and negligence , the fire Is spied in populous cities .
What , ho , Brabantio !
Signior Brabantio , ho !
Thieves !
Thieves !
Look to your house , your daughter , and your bags !
Thieves !
thieves !
Sir , would she give you so much of her lips As of her tongue she oft bestows on me , You'll have enough .
I find it still , when I have leave to sleep .
Marry , before your ladyship , I grant , She puts her tongue a little in her heart And chides with thinking .
You have little cause to say so .
Come on , come on .
You are pictures out of door , bells in your parlors , wild-cats in your kitchens , saints in your injuries , devils being offended , players in your housewifery , and housewives in your beds .
Oh , fie upon thee , slanderer !
Nay , it is true , or else I am a Turk .
You rise to play and go to bed to work .
No , let me not .
What wouldst thou write of me , if thou should'st praise me ?
O gentle lady , do not put me to 't , For I am nothing , if not critical .
Come on , assay .
Ay , madam .
I am not merry , but I do beguile The thing I am by seeming otherwise .
Come , how wouldst thou praise me ?
Well praised !
If she be black , and thereto have a wit , She'll find a white that shall her blackness fit .
Worse and worse !
How if fair and foolish ?
Oh , heavy ignorance !
Thou praisest the worst best .
But what praise couldst thou bestow on a deserving woman indeed , one that in the authority of her merit did justly put on the vouch of very malice itself ?
She that was ever fair and never proud , Had tongue at will and yet was never loud , Never lacked gold and yet went never gay , Fled from her wish and yet said "Now I may , " She that being angered , her revenge being nigh , Bade her wrong stay and her displeasure fly , She that in wisdom never was so frail To change the cod's head for the salmon's tail , She that could think and ne'er disclose her mind , See suitors following and not look behind , She was a wight , if ever such wights were , To do what ?
To suckle fools and chronicle small beer .
Oh , most lame and impotent conclusion !
Do not learn of him , Emilia , though he be thy husband .
How say you , Cassio ?
Is he not a most profane and liberal counselor ?
He speaks home , madam .
You may relish him more in the soldier than in the scholar .
I know his trumpet .
Tis truly so .
Let's meet him and receive him .
Lo , where he comes !
Oh my fair warrior !
My dear Othello !
It gives me wonder great as my content To see you here before me .
Oh , my soul's joy !
If it were now to die , 'Twere now to be most happy , for I fear My soul hath her content so absolute That not another comfort like to this Succeeds in unknown fate .
The heavens forbid But that our loves and comforts should increase , Even as our days do grow .
Amen to that , sweet powers !
I can not speak enough of this content .
It stops me here , it is too much of joy .
Come , let us to the castle .
News , friends !
Our wars are done , the Turks are drowned .
How does my old acquaintance of this isle ? , Honey , you shall be well desired in Cyprus , I have found great love amongst them .
Bring thou the master to the citadel .
He is a good one , and his worthiness Does challenge much respect. , Come , Desdemona , Once more , well met at Cyprus .
Do thou meet me presently at the harbor. , Come hither .
The lieutenant tonight watches on the court of guard .
First , I must tell thee this : Desdemona is directly in love with him .
With him ?
Why , 'tis not possible .
Lay thy finger thus , and let thy soul be instructed .
All which the Moor is defective in .
Now sir , this granted , as it is a most pregnant and unforced position , who stands so eminent in the degree of this fortune as Cassio does ?
Besides , the knave is handsome , young , and hath all those requisites in him that folly and green minds look after .
I can not believe that in her .
She's full of most blessed condition .
The wine she drinks is made of grapes .
If she had been blessed , she would never have loved the Moor .
Blessed pudding !
Didst not mark that ?
They met so near with their lips that their breaths embraced together .
Pish !
But , sir , be you ruled by me .
I have brought you from Venice .
Watch you tonight for the command , I'll lay 't upon you .
Cassio knows you not .
I'll not be far from you .
Do you find some occasion to anger Cassio , either by speaking too loud , or tainting his discipline , or from what other course you please , which the time shall more favorably minister .
Well .
Sir , he's rash and very sudden in choler , and haply may strike at you .
Provoke him that he may .
For even out of that will I cause these of Cyprus to mutiny , whose qualification shall come into no true taste again but by the displanting of Cassio .
I will do this , if you can bring it to any opportunity .
I warrant thee .
Meet me by and by at the citadel .
I must fetch his necessaries ashore .
Farewell .
Adieu .
The thought whereof Doth , like a poisonous mineral , gnaw my inwards , And nothing can or shall content my soul Till I am evened with him , wife for wife .
Or , failing so , yet that I put the Moor At least into a jealousy so strong That judgment can not cure .
For besides these beneficial news , it is the celebration of his nuptial .
So much was his pleasure should be proclaimed .
All offices are open , and there is full liberty of feasting from this present hour of five till the bell have told eleven .
Bless the isle of Cyprus and our noble general Othello !
Iago is most honest .
Michael , good night .
Tomorrow with your earliest Let me have speech with you. , Come , my dear love , The purchase made , the fruits are to ensue : That profit's yet to come 'tween me and you .
Good night .
Welcome , Iago .
We must to the watch .
Our general cast us thus early for the love of his Desdemona , who let us not therefore blame .
What is the reason of this terrible summons ?
What is the matter there ?
Signior , is all your family within ?
Are your doors locked ?
Why , wherefore ask you this ?
Zounds , sir , you're robbed !
For shame , put on your gown .
Your heart is burst , you have lost half your soul .
Even now , now , very now , an old black ram Is tupping your white ewe .
Arise , arise , Awake the snorting citizens with the bell Or else the devil will make a grandsire of you .
Arise , I say !
What , have you lost your wits ?
Most reverend signior , do you know my voice ?
Not I .
What are you ?
My name is Roderigo .
I have charged thee not to haunt about my doors .
In honest plainness thou hast heard me say My daughter is not for thee .
Sir , sir , sir ,
Indeed she's a most fresh and delicate creature .
What an eye she has !
An inviting eye , and yet methinks right modest .
And when she speaks , is it not an alarum to love ?
She is indeed perfection .
Well , happiness to their sheets !
Not tonight , good Iago .
I have very poor and unhappy brains for drinking .
I could well wish courtesy would invent some other custom of entertainment .
Oh , they are our friends .
But one cup .
I'll drink for you .
I have drunk but one cup tonight , and that was craftily qualified too , and behold what innovation it makes here .
What , man , 'tis a night of revels !
The gallants desire it .
Where are they ?
Here at the door .
I pray you call them in .
I'll do 't , but it dislikes me .
If I can fasten but one cup upon him , With that which he hath drunk tonight already , He'll be as full of quarrel and offense As my young mistress ' dog .
Now 'mongst this flock of drunkards Am I to put our Cassio in some action That may offend the isle .
But here they come .
If consequence do but approve my dream My boat sails freely , both with wind and stream .
Fore heaven , they have given me a rouse already .
Good faith , a little one , not past a pint , As I am a soldier .
Some wine , ho !
Fore heaven , an excellent song .
I learned it in England where indeed they are most potent in potting .
Your Dane , your German , and your swag-bellied Hollander , Drink , ho ! , are nothing to your English .
Is your Englishman so expert in his drinking ?
Why , he drinks you with facility your Dane dead drunk ; he sweats not to overthrow your Almain .
To the health of our general !
I am for it , lieutenant , and I'll do you justice .
Oh , sweet England !
Why , this is a more exquisite song than the other .
Will you hear 't again ?
No , for I hold him to be unworthy of his place that does those things .
Well , heaven's above all , and there be souls must be saved , and there be souls must not be saved .
It's true , good lieutenant .
For mine own part , no offence to the general nor any man of quality , I hope to be saved .
And so do I too , lieutenant .
Ay , but ( by your leave ) not before me .
The lieutenant is to be saved before the ancient .
Let's have no more of this , let's to our affairs. , Forgive us our sins ! , Gentlemen , let's look to our business .
Do not think , gentlemen , I am drunk .
I am not drunk now .
I can stand well enough , and I speak well enough .
Excellent well !
Why , very well then .
You must not think then that I am drunk .
Tis pity of him .
But is he often thus ?
Tis evermore the prologue to his sleep .
He'll watch the horologe a double set If drink rock not his cradle .
It were well The general were put in mind of it .
Is not this true ?
And 'tis great pity that the noble Moor Should hazard such a place as his own second With one of an ingraft infirmity .
It were an honest action to say So to the Moor .
Why , so .
Now have I done a good day's work .
You peers , continue this united league .
Dissemble not your hatred .
Swear your love .
And with my hand I seal my true heart's love .
And I as I love Hastings with my heart .
You have been factious one against the other. , Wife , love Lord Hastings .
Dorset , embrace him. , Hastings , love Lord Marquess .
This interchange of love , I here protest , Upon my part shall be inviolable .
And so swear I .
Now , princely Buckingham , seal thou this league With thy embracements to my wife's allies And make me happy in your unity .
A pleasing cordial , princely Buckingham , Is this thy vow unto my sickly heart .
And in good time , Here comes Sir Richard Ratcliffe and the duke .
Good morrow to my sovereign king and queen , And , princely peers , a happy time of day .
Happy indeed , as we have spent the day .
A blessed labor , my most sovereign lord .
Tis death to me to be at enmity ; I hate it , and desire all good men's love .
A holy day shall this be kept hereafter .
I would to God all strifes were well compounded .
My sovereign lord , I do beseech your Highness To take our brother Clarence to your grace .
Why , madam , have I offered love for this , To be so flouted in this royal presence ?
Who knows not that the gentle duke is dead ?
Who knows not he is dead !
Who knows he is ?
All-seeing heaven , what a world is this !
Look I so pale , Lord Dorset , as the rest ?
Is Clarence dead ?
The order was reversed .
But he , poor man , by your first order died , And that a winged Mercury did bear .
Some tardy cripple bear the countermand , That came too lag to see him buried .
God grant that some , less noble and less loyal , Nearer in bloody thoughts , and not in blood , Deserve not worse than wretched Clarence did , And yet go current from suspicion .
I prithee , peace .
My soul is full of sorrow .
I will not rise unless your Highness hear me .
Then say at once what is it thou requests .
The forfeit , sovereign , of my servant's life , Who slew today a riotous gentleman Lately attendant on the duke of Norfolk .
We know thy charge , Brakenbury , and will obey .
We are the queen's abjects and must obey. , Brother , farewell .
I know it pleaseth neither of us well .
Well , your imprisonment shall not be long .
I will deliver you or else lie for you .
Meantime , have patience .
I must perforce .
Farewell .
Go tread the path that thou shalt ne'er return .
Simple , plain Clarence , I do love thee so That I will shortly send thy soul to heaven , If heaven will take the present at our hands .
But who comes here ?
Good time of day unto my gracious lord .
As much unto my good Lord Chamberlain .
Well are you welcome to the open air .
How hath your lordship brooked imprisonment ?
My brother killed no man ; his fault was thought , And yet his punishment was bitter death .
Who sued to me for him ?
This is the fruits of rashness .
Marked you not How that the guilty kindred of the queen Looked pale when they did hear of Clarence ' death ?
O , they did urge it still unto the king .
God will revenge it .
Come , lords , will you go To comfort Edward with our company ?
We wait upon your Grace .
Good grandam , tell us , is our father dead ?
No , boy .
My pretty cousins , you mistake me both .
Then , you conclude , my grandam , he is dead .
The king mine uncle is to blame for it .
God will revenge it , whom I will importune With earnest prayers , all to that effect .
And so will I .
Peace , children , peace .
The king doth love you well .
Incapable and shallow innocents , You can not guess who caused your father's death .
Think you my uncle did dissemble , grandam ?
Ay , boy .
I can not think it .
Hark , what noise is this ?
I'll join with black despair against my soul And to myself become an enemy .
Why grow the branches when the root is gone ?
Why wither not the leaves that want their sap ?
If you will live , lament .
If die , be brief , That our swift-winged souls may catch the king's , Or , like obedient subjects , follow him To his new kingdom of ne'er-changing night .
O , what cause have I , Thine being but a moiety of my moan , To overgo thy woes and drown thy cries !
All springs reduce their currents to mine eyes , That I , being governed by the watery moon , May send forth plenteous tears to drown the world .
Ah , for my husband , for my dear lord Edward !
Ah , for our father , for our dear lord Clarence !
Alas for both , both mine , Edward and Clarence !
What stay had I but Edward ?
And he's gone .
What stay had we but Clarence ?
And he's gone .
And they are gone .
Was never widow had so dear a loss .
Were never orphans had so dear a loss .
Was never mother had so dear a loss .
Alas , I am the mother of these griefs .
She for an Edward weeps , and so do I ; I for a Clarence weep ; so doth not she .
These babes for Clarence weep and so do I ; I for an Edward weep ; so do not they .
Madam , bethink you , like a careful mother , Of the young prince your son .
In him your comfort lives .
Sister , have comfort .
All of us have cause To wail the dimming of our shining star , But none can help our harms by wailing them. , Madam , my mother , I do cry you mercy ; I did not see your Grace .
Humbly on my knee I crave your blessing .
God bless thee , and put meekness in thy breast , Love , charity , obedience , and true duty .
You cloudy princes and heart-sorrowing peers That bear this heavy mutual load of moan , Now cheer each other in each other's love .
Though we have spent our harvest of this king , We are to reap the harvest of his son .
The broken rancor of your high-swoll'n hates , But lately splintered , knit , and joined together , Must gently be preserved , cherished , and kept .
Meseemeth good that with some little train Forthwith from Ludlow the young prince be fet Hither to London , to be crowned our king .
Why "with some little train , " my Lord of Buckingham ?
I hope the king made peace with all of us ; And the compact is firm and true in me .
And so in me , and so , I think , in all .
Therefore I say with noble Buckingham That it is meet so few should fetch the prince .
And so say I .
My lord , whoever journeys to the prince , For God's sake let not us two at home .
For by the way I'll sort occasion , As index to the story we late talked of , To part the queen's proud kindred from the prince .
My other self , my council's consistory , My oracle , my prophet , my dear cousin , I , as a child , will go by thy direction Toward Ludlow then , for we'll not stay behind .
Good morrow , neighbor , whither away so fast ?
I promise you I scarcely know myself .
Hear you the news abroad ?
Yes , that the king is dead .
Neighbors , God speed .
Give you good morrow , sir .
Doth this news hold of good King Edward's death ?
Ay , sir , it is too true , God help the while .
Then , masters , look to see a troublous world .
No , no , by God's good grace , his son shall reign .
Woe to the land that's governed by a child .
In him there is a hope of government , Which , in his nonage , council under him , And , in his full and ripened years , himself , No doubt shall then , and till then , govern well .
With patience , noble lord , as prisoners must .
More pity that the eagle should be mewed While kites and buzzards prey at liberty .
What news abroad ?
Tis very grievous to be thought upon .
Where is he , in his bed ?
He is .
Go you before , and I will follow you .
So stood the state when Henry the Sixth Was crowned in Paris but at nine months old .
Stood the state so ?
Better it were they all came by his father , Or by the father there were none at all , For emulation who shall now be nearest Will touch us all too near if God prevent not .
O , full of danger is the duke of Gloucester , And the queen's sons and brothers haught and proud , And were they to be ruled , and not to rule , This sickly land might solace as before .
Come , come , we fear the worst .
All will be well .
Untimely storms make men expect a dearth .
All may be well ; but if God sort it so , 'T is more than we deserve or I expect .
Before the days of change , still is it so .
But leave it all to God .
Whither away ?
Marry , we were sent for to the justices .
Tomorrow or next day they will be here .
I long with all my heart to see the prince .
I hope he is much grown since last I saw him .
Ay , mother , but I would not have it so .
Why , my young cousin ?
It is good to grow .
Grandam , one night as we did sit at supper , My uncle Rivers talked how I did grow More than my brother : "Ay , " quoth my uncle Gloucester , "Small herbs have grace ; great weeds do grow apace." And since , methinks I would not grow so fast Because sweet flowers are slow and weeds make haste .
Good faith , good faith , the saying did not hold In him that did object the same to thee !
He was the wretched'st thing when he was young , So long a-growing and so leisurely , That if this rule were true , he should be gracious .
And so no doubt he is , my gracious madam .
I hope he is , but yet let mothers doubt .
Now , by my troth , if I had been remembered , I could have given my uncle's grace a flout To touch his growth nearer than he touched mine .
How , my pretty York ?
I prithee let me hear it .
Marry , they say my uncle grew so fast That he could gnaw a crust at two hours old .
Twas full two years ere I could get a tooth .
Grandam , this would have been a biting jest .
I prithee , pretty York , who told thee this ?
Grandam , his nurse .
His nurse ?
Why , she was dead ere thou wast born .
If 'twere not she , I can not tell who told me .
A parlous boy !
Go to , you are too shrewd .
Good madam , be not angry with the child .
Pitchers have ears .
Here comes a messenger .
What news ?
Such news , my lord , as grieves me to report .
How doth the prince ?
Well , madam , and in health .
What is thy news then ?
The mighty dukes , Gloucester and Buckingham .
For what offence ?
The sum of all I can , I have disclosed .
Why , or for what , the nobles were committed Is all unknown to me , my gracious lord .
Ay me !
I see the ruin of my house .
Welcome , destruction , blood , and massacre .
My husband lost his life to get the crown , And often up and down my sons were tossed For me to joy , and weep , their gain and loss .
O , preposterous And frantic outrage , end thy damned spleen , Or let me die , to look on death no more .
The weary way hath made you melancholy .
No , uncle , but our crosses on the way Have made it tedious , wearisome , and heavy .
I want more uncles here to welcome me .
Those uncles which you want were dangerous .
Your Grace attended to their sugared words But looked not on the poison of their hearts .
God keep you from them , and from such false friends .
God keep me from false friends , but they were none .
My lord , the mayor of London comes to greet you .
God bless your Grace with health and happy days .
Fie , what a slug is Hastings that he comes not To tell us whether they will come or no !
And in good time here comes the sweating lord .
Welcome , my lord .
What , will our mother come ?
On what occasion God He knows , not I , The queen your mother and your brother York Have taken sanctuary .
The tender prince Would fain have come with me to meet your Grace , But by his mother was perforce withheld .
Not for all this land Would I be guilty of so deep a sin .
Weigh it but with the grossness of this age , You break not sanctuary in seizing him .
This prince hath neither claimed it nor deserved it And therefore , in mine opinion , can not have it .
Oft have I heard of sanctuary men , But sanctuary children , ne'er till now .
My lord , you shall o'errule my mind for once. , Come on , Lord Hastings , will you go with me ?
I go , my lord .
Good lords , make all the speedy haste you may .
Say , uncle Gloucester , if our brother come , Where shall we sojourn till our coronation ?
Where it seems best unto your royal self .
I do not like the Tower , of any place. , Did Julius Caesar build that place , my lord ?
He did , my gracious lord , begin that place , Which , since , succeeding ages have re-edified .
Is it upon record , or else reported Successively from age to age , he built it ?
Upon record , my gracious lord .
But say , my lord , it were not registered , Methinks the truth should live from age to age , As 'twere retailed to all posterity , Even to the general all-ending day .
What say you , uncle ?
Death makes no conquest of this conqueror , For now he lives in fame , though not in life .
He can not live , I hope , and must not die Till George be packed with post-horse up to heaven .
For then I'll marry Warwick's youngest daughter .
What though I killed her husband and her father ?
The readiest way to make the wench amends Is to become her husband and her father ; The which will I , not all so much for love As for another secret close intent By marrying her which I must reach unto .
But yet I run before my horse to market .
Clarence still breathes ; Edward still lives and reigns .
When they are gone , then must I count my gains .
What , my gracious lord ?
Richard of York , how fares our loving brother ?
Well , my dread lord , so must I call you now .
How fares our cousin , noble Lord of York ?
I thank you , gentle uncle .
O , my lord , You said that idle weeds are fast in growth .
The prince my brother hath outgrown me far .
He hath , my lord .
And therefore is he idle ?
O , my fair cousin , I must not say so .
Then is he more beholding to you than I .
He may command me as my sovereign , But you have power in me as in a kinsman .
I pray you , uncle , give me this dagger .
My dagger , little cousin ?
With all my heart .
A beggar , brother ?
Of my kind uncle , that I know will give , And being but a toy , which is no grief to give .
A greater gift than that I'll give my cousin .
A greater gift ?
O , that's the sword to it .
Ay , gentle cousin , were it light enough .
O , then I see you will part but with light gifts .
In weightier things you'll say a beggar nay .
It is too heavy for your Grace to wear .
I weigh it lightly , were it heavier .
How ?
Uncle , your Grace knows how to bear with him .
You mean , to bear me , not to bear with me. , Uncle , my brother mocks both you and me .
I shall not sleep in quiet at the Tower .
Why , what should you fear ?
Marry , my uncle Clarence ' angry ghost .
My grandam told me he was murdered there .
I fear no uncles dead .
Nor none that live , I hope .
An if they live , I hope I need not fear .
No doubt , no doubt .
O , 'tis a parlous boy , Bold , quick , ingenious , forward , capable .
He is all the mother's , from the top to toe .
Well , let them rest. , Come hither , Catesby .
He , for his father's sake , so loves the prince That he will not be won to aught against him .
What think'st thou then of Stanley ?
Will not he ?
He will do all in all as Hastings doth .
Well then , no more but this : go , gentle Catesby , And , as it were far off , sound thou Lord Hastings How he doth stand affected to our purpose And summon him tomorrow to the Tower To sit about the coronation .
If thou dost find him tractable to us , Encourage him and show him all our reasons .
If he be leaden , icy , cold , unwilling , Be thou so too , and so break off the talk , And give us notice of his inclination ; For we tomorrow hold divided councils , Wherein thyself shalt highly be employed .
Commend me to Lord William .
My good lords both , with all the heed I can .
Shall we hear from you , Catesby , ere we sleep ?
You shall , my lord .
At Crosby Place , there shall you find us both .
Now , my lord , what shall we do , if we perceive Lord Hastings will not yield to our complots ?
Chop off his head .
Something we will determine .
And look when I am king , claim thou of me The earldom of Hereford , and all the moveables Whereof the king my brother was possessed .
I'll claim that promise at your Grace's hands .
And look to have it yielded with all kindness .
Come , let us sup betimes , that afterwards We may digest our complots in some form .
One from the Lord Stanley .
Upon the stroke of four .
Can not my Lord Stanley sleep these tedious nights ?
So it appears by that I have to say .
First , he commends him to your noble self .
What then ?
Then certifies your Lordship that this night He dreamt the boar had razed his helm Besides , he says there are two councils kept , And that may be determined at the one Which may make you and him to rue at th ' other .
His Honor and myself are at the one , And at the other is my good friend Catesby , Where nothing can proceed that toucheth us Whereof I shall not have intelligence .
Tell him his fears are shallow , without instance .
And for his dreams , I wonder he's so simple To trust the mock'ry of unquiet slumbers .
To fly the boar before the boar pursues Were to incense the boar to follow us And make pursuit where he did mean no chase .
Many good morrows to my noble lord .
Good morrow , Catesby .
You are early stirring .
What news , what news in this our tott'ring state ?
It is a reeling world indeed , my lord , And I believe will never stand upright Till Richard wear the garland of the realm .
How "wear the garland" ?
Dost thou mean the crown ?
Ay , my good lord .
I'll have this crown of mine cut from my shoulders Before I'll see the crown so foul misplaced .
But canst thou guess that he doth aim at it ?
Ay , on my life , and hopes to find you forward Upon his party for the gain thereof ; And thereupon he sends you this good news , That this same very day your enemies , The kindred of the queen , must die at Pomfret .
Indeed , I am no mourner for that news , Because they have been still my adversaries .
God keep your Lordship in that gracious mind .
Well , Catesby , ere a fortnight make me older I'll send some packing that yet think not on 't .
Tis a vile thing to die , my gracious lord , When men are unprepared and look not for it .
O monstrous , monstrous !
And so falls it out With Rivers , Vaughan , Grey ; and so 'twill do With some men else that think themselves as safe As thou and I , who , as thou know'st , are dear To princely Richard and to Buckingham .
The princes both make high account of you , I know they do , and I have well deserved it .
Fear you the boar , and go so unprovided ?
My lord , good morrow .
Good morrow , Catesby. , You may jest on , but , by the Holy Rood , I do not like these several councils , I .
My lord , I hold my life as dear as you do yours , And never in my days , I do protest , Was it so precious to me as 'tis now .
Think you but that I know our state secure , I would be so triumphant as I am ?
Pray God , I say , I prove a needless coward !
What , shall we toward the Tower ?
The day is spent .
Set down , set down your honorable load , If honor may be shrouded in a hearse , Whilst I awhile obsequiously lament Th ' untimely fall of virtuous Lancaster .
Wot you what , my lord ?
Today the lords you talked of are beheaded .
They , for their truth , might better wear their heads Than some that have accused them wear their hats .
But come , my lord , let's away .
Go on before .
I'll talk with this good fellow .
How now , sirrah !
How goes the world with thee ?
The better that your Lordship please to ask .
I tell thee , man , 'tis better with me now Than when thou met'st me last where now we meet .
But now , I tell thee , keep it to thyself , This day those enemies are put to death , And I in better state than e'er I was .
God hold it , to your Honor's good content !
There , drink that for me .
I thank your Honor .
Well met , my lord .
I am glad to see your Honor .
I thank thee , good Sir John , with all my heart .
I am in your debt for your last exercise .
Come the next sabbath , and I will content you .
Your friends at Pomfret , they do need the priest ; Your Honor hath no shriving work in hand .
Good faith , and when I met this holy man , The men you talk of came into my mind .
What , go you toward the Tower ?
I shall return before your Lordship thence .
Nay , like enough , for I stay dinner there .
I'll wait upon your Lordship .
Dispatch .
The limit of your lives is out .
O Pomfret , Pomfret !
O thou bloody prison , Fatal and ominous to noble peers !
Now Margaret's curse is fall'n upon our heads , When she exclaimed on Hastings , you , and I , For standing by when Richard stabbed her son .
Then cursed she Hastings .
O , remember , God , To hear her prayer for them , as now for us !
And for my sister and her princely sons , Be satisfied , dear God , with our true blood , Which , as thou know'st , unjustly must be spilt .
Make haste .
The hour of death is expiate .
Come , Grey .
Come , Vaughan .
Let us all embrace .
In God's name , speak .
When is the royal day ?
Is all things ready for the royal time ?
It is , and wants but nomination .
Tomorrow , then , I judge a happy day .
Who knows the Lord Protector's mind herein ?
Who is most inward with the noble duke ?
Your Grace , we think , should soonest know his mind .
We know each other's faces ; for our hearts , He knows no more of mine than I of yours , Or I of his , my lord , than you of mine. , Lord Hastings , you and he are near in love .
I thank his Grace .
I know he loves me well .
But for his purpose in the coronation , I have not sounded him , nor he delivered His gracious pleasure any way therein .
But you , my honorable lords , may name the time , And in the duke's behalf I'll give my voice , Which I presume he'll take in gentle part .
In happy time here comes the duke himself .
My noble lords and cousins all , good morrow .
Had you not come upon your cue , my lord , William Lord Hastings had pronounced your part , I mean your voice for crowning of the king .
Than my Lord Hastings no man might be bolder .
Cousin of Buckingham , a word with you .
I'll go with you .
We have not yet set down this day of triumph .
Where is my lord the duke of Gloucester ?
I have sent for these strawberries .
His grace looks cheerfully and smooth this morning .
There's some conceit or other likes him well When that he bids good morrow with such spirit .
I think there's never a man in Christendom Can lesser hide his love or hate than he , For by his face straight shall you know his heart .
I pray God he be not , I say .
Then be your eyes the witness of their evil .
If they have done this deed , my noble lord , If ?
Thou protector of this damned strumpet , Talk'st thou to me of "ifs" ?
Thou art a traitor , Off with his head .
Woe , woe for England !
Stanley did dream the boar did raze his helm , And I did scorn it and disdain to fly .
Three times today my foot-cloth horse did stumble , And started when he looked upon the Tower , As loath to bear me to the slaughterhouse .
O , now I need the priest that spake to me !
I now repent I told the pursuivant , As too triumphing , how mine enemies Today at Pomfret bloodily were butchered , And I myself secure in grace and favor .
O Margaret , Margaret , now thy heavy curse Is lighted on poor Hastings ' wretched head .
Make a short shrift .
He longs to see your head .
O momentary grace of mortal men , Which we more hunt for than the grace of God !
Who builds his hopes in air of your good looks Lives like a drunken sailor on a mast , Ready with every nod to tumble down Into the fatal bowels of the deep .
Come , come , dispatch .
Tis bootless to exclaim .
O bloody Richard !
Miserable England , I prophesy the fearfull'st time to thee That ever wretched age hath looked upon. , Come , lead me to the block .
Bear him my head .
They smile at me that shortly shall be dead .
Ghastly looks Are at my service , like enforced smiles , And both are ready in their offices , At any time to grace my stratagems .
But what , is Catesby gone ?
Catesby , o'erlook the walls .
If ever he have wife , let her be made More miserable by the death of him Than I am made by my poor lord and thee. , Come now towards Chertsey with your holy load , Taken from Paul's to be interred there .
What black magician conjures up this fiend To stop devoted charitable deeds ?
Lord Mayor , the reason we have sent , Look back !
Defend thee !
Here are enemies .
God and our innocence defend and guard us !
Be patient .
They are friends , Ratcliffe and Lovell .
Here is the head of that ignoble traitor , The dangerous and unsuspected Hastings .
So dear I loved the man that I must weep .
So smooth he daubed his vice with show of virtue That , his apparent open guilt omitted , I mean his conversation with Shore's wife , He lived from all attainder of suspects .
Had he done so ?
What , think you we are Turks or infidels ?
I never looked for better at his hands After he once fell in with Mistress Shore .
But , my good lord , your Graces ' words shall serve As well as I had seen and heard him speak ; And do not doubt , right noble princes both , But I'll acquaint our duteous citizens With all your just proceedings in this case .
And to that end we wished your Lordship here T ' avoid the censures of the carping world .
Moreover , urge his hateful luxury And bestial appetite in change of lust , Which stretched to their servants , daughters , wives , Even where his raging eye or savage heart , Without control , lusted to make his prey .
Nay , for a need , thus far come near my person : Tell them when that my mother went with child Of that insatiate Edward , noble York My princely father then had wars in France , And , by true computation of the time , Found that the issue was not his begot , Which well appeared in his lineaments , Being nothing like the noble duke my father .
Yet touch this sparingly , as 'twere far off , Because , my lord , you know my mother lives .
And so , my lord , adieu .
If you thrive well , bring them to Baynard's Castle , Where you shall find me well accompanied With reverend fathers and well-learned bishops .
I go ; and towards three or four o'clock Look for the news that the Guildhall affords .
Go , Lovell , with all speed to Doctor Shaw .
Now will I go to take some privy order To draw the brats of Clarence out of sight , And to give order that no manner of person Have any time recourse unto the princes .
Here's a good world the while .
Who is so gross That can not see this palpable device ?
Bad is the world , and all will come to naught When such ill dealing must be seen in thought .
Now , by the holy mother of our Lord , The citizens are mum , say not a word .
Touched you the bastardy of Edward's children ?
No .
His answer was , the people were not used To be spoke to but by the recorder .
Would not they speak ?
Will not the mayor then and his brethren come ?
The mayor is here at hand .
And look you get a prayer book in your hand And stand between two churchmen , good my lord , For on that ground I'll make a holy descant .
And be not easily won to our requests .
I go .
An if you plead as well for them As I can say "nay" to thee for myself , No doubt we bring it to a happy issue .
Go , go , up to the leads .
The Lord Mayor knocks .
Welcome , my lord .
I think the duke will not be spoke withal .
Now , Catesby , what says your lord to my request ?
He doth entreat your Grace , my noble lord , To visit him tomorrow or next day .
Return , good Catesby , to the gracious duke .
Tell him myself , the mayor , and aldermen , No less importing than our general good , In deep designs , and matters of great moment Are come to have some conference with his grace .
I'll signify so much unto him straight .
Ah , ha , my lord , this prince is not an Edward !
He is not lolling on a lewd love bed , But on his knees at meditation ; Not dallying with a brace of courtesans , But meditating with two deep divines ; Not sleeping , to engross his idle body , But praying , to enrich his watchful soul .
Happy were England would this virtuous prince Take on his grave the sovereignty thereof .
But sure I fear we shall not win him to it .
Marry , God defend his grace should say us nay !
I fear he will .
Here Catesby comes again .
Now , Catesby , what says his grace ?
He wonders to what end you have assembled Such troops of citizens to come to him , His grace not being warned thereof before .
He fears , my lord , you mean no good to him .
Sorry I am my noble cousin should Suspect me that I mean no good to him .
When holy and devout religious men Are at their beads , 'tis much to draw them thence , So sweet is zealous contemplation .
See where his Grace stands , 'tween two clergymen .
My lord , there needs no such apology .
I do beseech your Grace pardon me , Who , earnest in the service of my God , Deferred the visitation of my friends .
I do suspect I have done some offense That seems disgracious in the city's eye , And that you come to reprehend my ignorance .
You have , my lord .
Sweet saint , for charity , be not so curst .
If thou delight to view thy heinous deeds , Behold this pattern of thy butcheries .
O , gentlemen , see , see dead Henry's wounds Open their congealed mouths and bleed afresh ! , Blush , blush , thou lump of foul deformity , For 'tis thy presence that exhales this blood From cold and empty veins where no blood dwells .
O earth , which this blood drink'st revenge his death !
Either heaven with lightning strike the murderer dead , Or earth gape open wide and eat him quick , As thou dost swallow up this good king's blood , Which his hell-governed arm hath butchered !
If not to answer , you might haply think Tongue-tied ambition , not replying , yielded To bear the golden yoke of sovereignty , Which fondly you would here impose on me .
First , if all obstacles were cut away And that my path were even to the crown As the ripe revenue and due of birth , Yet so much is my poverty of spirit , So mighty and so many my defects , That I would rather hide me from my greatness , Being a bark to brook no mighty sea , Than in my greatness covet to be hid And in the vapor of my glory smothered .
But , God be thanked , there is no need of me , And much I need to help you , were there need .
The royal tree hath left us royal fruit , Which , mellowed by the stealing hours of time , Will well become the seat of majesty , And make , no doubt , us happy by his reign .
On him I lay what you would lay on me , The right and fortune of his happy stars , Which God defend that I should wring from him .
For first was he contract to Lady Lucy , Your mother lives a witness to that vow , And afterward by substitute betrothed To Bona , sister to the king of France .
These both put off , a poor petitioner , A care-crazed mother to a many sons , A beauty-waning and distressed widow , Even in the afternoon of her best days , Made prize and purchase of his wanton eye , Seduced the pitch and height of his degree To base declension and loathed bigamy .
Refuse not , mighty lord , this proffered love .
O , make them joyful .
Grant their lawful suit .
Alas , why would you heap this care on me ?
I am unfit for state and majesty .
I do beseech you , take it not amiss ; I can not , nor I will not , yield to you .
Zounds , I'll entreat no more .
O , do not swear , my lord of Buckingham !
If you deny them , all the land will rue it .
Will you enforce me to a world of cares ?
Call them again .
I am not made of stones , But penetrable to your kind entreaties , Albeit against my conscience and my soul .
God bless your Grace !
We see it and will say it .
In saying so , you shall but say the truth .
Then I salute you with this royal title : Long live Richard , England's worthy king !
Amen .
Tomorrow will it please you to be crowned ?
Even when you please , since you will have it so .
Who meets us here ?
My niece Plantagenet Led in the hand of her kind aunt of Gloucester ?
Now , for my life , she's wandering to the Tower , On pure heart's love , to greet the tender prince. , Daughter , well met .
Whither away ?
No farther than the Tower , and , as I guess , Upon the like devotion as yourselves , To gratulate the gentle princes there .
Kind sister , thanks .
We'll enter all together .
And in good time here the lieutenant comes. , Master Lieutenant , pray you , by your leave , How doth the prince and my young son of York ?
Right well , dear madam .
By your patience , I may not suffer you to visit them .
The king hath strictly charged the contrary .
The king ?
Who's that ?
I mean , the Lord Protector .
The Lord protect him from that kingly title !
Hath he set bounds between their love and me ?
I am their mother .
Who shall bar me from them ?
I am their father's mother .
I will see them .
Their aunt I am in law , in love their mother .
Then bring me to their sights .
I'll bear thy blame And take thy office from thee , on my peril .
No , madam , no .
I may not leave it so .
I am bound by oath , and therefore pardon me .
Let me but meet you ladies one hour hence , And I'll salute your Grace of York as mother And reverend looker-on , of two fair queens .
Ah , cut my lace asunder , That my pent heart may have some scope to beat , Or else I swoon with this dead-killing news !
O , unpleasing news !
Thy mother's name is ominous to children .
You shall have letters from me to my son In your behalf , to meet you on the way .
Be not ta'en tardy by unwise delay .
O ill-dispersing wind of misery !
And I in all unwillingness will go .
O , would to God that the inclusive verge Of golden metal that must round my brow Were red-hot steel to sear me to the brains !
To feed my humor , wish thyself no harm .
No ?
Why ?
Poor heart , adieu .
I pity thy complaining .
No more than from my soul I mourn for yours .
Farewell , thou woeful welcomer of glory .
Rude ragged nurse , old sullen playfellow For tender princes , use my babies well .
So foolish sorrows bids your stones farewell .
Lady , you know no rules of charity , Which renders good for bad , blessings for curses .
Villain , thou know'st not law of God nor man .
No beast so fierce but knows some touch of pity .
But I know none , and therefore am no beast .
More wonderful , when angels are so angry .
Vouchsafe , divine perfection of a woman , Of these supposed crimes to give me leave By circumstance but to acquit myself .
Vouchsafe , defused infection of a man , Of these known evils but to give me leave By circumstance to curse thy cursed self .
Fairer than tongue can name thee , let me have Some patient leisure to excuse myself .
Fouler than heart can think thee , thou canst make No excuse current but to hang thyself .
By such despair I should accuse myself .
My gracious sovereign .
Give me thy hand .
Thus high , by thy advice And thy assistance is King Richard seated .
But shall we wear these glories for a day , Or shall they last and we rejoice in them ?
Still live they , and forever let them last .
Ah , Buckingham , now do I play the touch , To try if thou be current gold indeed .
Young Edward lives ; think now what I would speak .
Say on , my loving lord .
Ha !
Tis so , but Edward lives .
True , noble prince .
O bitter consequence That Edward still should live "true noble prince" !
Cousin , thou wast not wont to be so dull .
Shall I be plain ?
What sayest thou now ?
Your Grace may do your pleasure .
Tut , tut , thou art all ice ; thy kindness freezes .
Say , have I thy consent that they shall die ?
Give me some little breath , some pause , dear lord , Before I positively speak in this .
I will resolve you herein presently .
And unrespective boys .
Know'st thou not any whom corrupting gold Will tempt unto a close exploit of death ?
What is his name ?
His name , my lord , is Tyrrel .
I partly know the man .
Go , call him hither , boy No more shall be the neighbor to my counsels Hath he so long held out with me , untired , And stops he now for breath ?
Well , be it so .
How now , Lord Stanley , what's the news ?
Know , my long lord , The marquess Dorset , as I hear , is fled To Richmond , in the parts where he abides .
Come hither , Catesby .
Rumor it abroad That Anne my wife is very grievous sick .
Inquire me out some mean poor gentleman , Whom I will marry straight to Clarence ' daughter .
Look how thou dream'st !
I say again , give out That Anne my queen is sick and like to die .
Is thy name Tyrrel ?
James Tyrrel , and your most obedient subject .
Art thou indeed ?
Dar'st thou resolve to kill a friend of mine ?
Why then , thou hast it .
Two deep enemies , Foes to my rest , and my sweet sleep's disturbers , Are they that I would have thee deal upon .
Tyrrel , I mean those bastards in the Tower .
Let me have open means to come to them , And soon I'll rid you from the fear of them .
Thou sing'st sweet music .
Hark , come hither , Tyrrel .
Go , by this token .
Rise , and lend thine ear .
There is no more but so .
Say it is done , And I will love thee and prefer thee for it .
I will dispatch it straight .
My lord , I have considered in my mind The late request that you did sound me in .
Well , let that rest .
Dorset is fled to Richmond .
I hear the news , my lord .
Stanley , he is your wife's son .
Well , look unto it .
My lord , I claim the gift , my due by promise , For which your honor and your faith is pawned , Th ' earldom of Hereford and the movables Which you promised I shall possess .
Stanley , look to your wife .
If she convey Letters to Richmond , you shall answer it .
What says your Highness to my just request ?
I do remember me , Henry the Sixth Did prophesy that Richmond should be king , When Richmond was a little peevish boy .
A king , perhaps , My lord , How chance the prophet could not at that time Have told me , I being by , that I should kill him ?
My lord , your promise for the earldom , Richmond !
When last I was at Exeter , The mayor in courtesy showed me the castle And called it Rougemont , at which name I started , Because a bard of Ireland told me once I should not live long after I saw Richmond .
My Lord , Ay , what's o'clock ?
I am thus bold to put your Grace in mind Of what you promised me .
Well , but what's o'clock ?
Upon the stroke of ten .
Well , let it strike .
Why let it strike ?
Because that , like a jack , thou keep'st the stroke Betwixt thy begging and my meditation .
I am not in the giving vein today .
Why then , resolve me whether you will or no .
Thou troublest me ; I am not in the vein .
And is it thus ?
Repays he my deep service With such deep contempt ?
Made I him king for this ?
O , let me think on Hastings and be gone To Brecknock , while my fearful head is on !
The tyrannous and bloody act is done , The most arch deed of piteous massacre That ever yet this land was guilty of .
Dighton and Forrest , whom I did suborn To do this piece of ruthless butchery , Albeit they were fleshed villains , bloody dogs , Melted with tenderness and mild compassion , Wept like two children in their deaths ' sad story .
Their lips were four red roses on a stalk , And in their summer beauty kissed each other .
Kind Tyrrel , am I happy in thy news ?
If to have done the thing you gave in charge Beget your happiness , be happy then , For it is done .
But did'st thou see them dead ?
I did , my lord .
And buried , gentle Tyrrel ?
The chaplain of the Tower hath buried them , But where , to say the truth , I do not know .
Come to me , Tyrrel , soon at after-supper , When thou shalt tell the process of their death .
Meantime , but think how I may do thee good , And be inheritor of thy desire .
Farewell till then .
I humbly take my leave .
The son of Clarence have I pent up close , His daughter meanly have I matched in marriage , The sons of Edward sleep in Abraham's bosom , And Anne my wife hath bid this world goodnight .
Now , for I know the Breton Richmond aims At young Elizabeth , my brother's daughter , And by that knot looks proudly on the crown , To her go I , a jolly thriving wooer .
My lord !
Good or bad news , that thou com'st in so bluntly ?
Bad news , my lord .
Morton is fled to Richmond , And Buckingham , backed with the hardy Welshmen , Is in the field , and still his power increaseth .
Ely with Richmond troubles me more near Than Buckingham and his rash-levied strength .
Say that I slew them not .
Then say they were not slain .
But dead they are , and devilish slave , by thee .
I did not kill your husband .
Why then , he is alive .
In thy foul throat thou liest .
Queen Margaret saw Thy murd'rous falchion smoking in his blood , The which thou once didst bend against her breast , But that thy brothers beat aside the point .
I was provoked by her sland'rous tongue , That laid their guilt upon my guiltless shoulders .
Thou wast provoked by thy bloody mind , That never dream'st on aught but butcheries .
Didst thou not kill this king ?
I grant you .
Dost grant me , hedgehog ?
Then , God grant me too Thou mayst be damned for that wicked deed .
O , he was gentle , mild , and virtuous .
The better for the King of heaven that hath him .
He is in heaven , where thou shalt never come .
Let him thank me , that holp to send him thither , For he was fitter for that place than earth .
Here in these confines slyly have I lurked To watch the waning of mine enemies .
A dire induction am I witness to , And will to France , hoping the consequence Will prove as bitter , black , and tragical .
Withdraw thee , wretched Margaret .
Who comes here ?
Ah , my poor princes !
Ah , my tender babes , My unblown flowers , new-appearing sweets , If yet your gentle souls fly in the air And be not fixed in doom perpetual , Hover about me with your airy wings And hear your mother's lamentation .
Hover about her ; say that right for right Hath dimmed your infant morn to aged night .
So many miseries have crazed my voice That my woe-wearied tongue is still and mute .
Edward Plantagenet , why art thou dead ?
Wilt thou , O God , fly from such gentle lambs And throw them in the entrails of the wolf ?
When didst thou sleep when such a deed was done ?
Give mine the benefit of seigniory , And let my griefs frown on the upper hand .
I had a Richard too , and thou did'st kill him ; I had a Rutland too ; thou holp'st to kill him .
O upright , just , and true-disposing God , How do I thank thee that this carnal cur Preys on the issue of his mother's body And makes her pew-fellow with others ' moan !
O Harry's wife , triumph not in my woes !
God witness with me , I have wept for thine .
Thy Edward he is dead , that killed my Edward , Thy other Edward dead , to quit my Edward ; Young York , he is but boot , because both they Matched not the high perfection of my loss .
Thy Clarence he is dead that stabbed my Edward , And the beholders of this frantic play , Th ' adulterate Hastings , Rivers , Vaughan , Grey , Untimely smothered in their dusky graves .
Richard yet lives , hell's black intelligencer , Only reserved their factor to buy souls And send them thither .
Cancel his bond of life , dear God I pray , That I may live to say , "The dog is dead."
O , thou didst prophesy the time would come That I should wish for thee to help me curse That bottled spider , that foul bunch-backed toad !
I called thee then "vain flourish of my fortune." I called thee then poor shadow , "painted queen , " The presentation of but what I was , The flattering index of a direful pageant , One heaved a-high , to be hurled down below , A mother only mocked with two fair babes , A dream of what thou wast , a garish flag To be the aim of every dangerous shot , A sign of dignity , a breath , a bubble , A queen in jest , only to fill the scene .
Where is thy husband now ?
Where be thy brothers ?
Where are thy two sons ?
Thus hath the course of justice whirled about And left thee but a very prey to time , Having no more but thought of what thou wast To torture thee the more , being what thou art .
Thou didst usurp my place , and dost thou not Usurp the just proportion of my sorrow ?
These English woes will make me smile in France .
O , thou well-skilled in curses , stay awhile , And teach me how to curse mine enemies .
Forbear to sleep the nights , and fast the days ; Compare dead happiness with living woe ; Think that thy babes were sweeter than they were , And he that slew them fouler than he is .
Bettering thy loss makes the bad causer worse .
Revolving this will teach thee how to curse .
My words are dull .
O , quicken them with thine !
Thy woes will make them sharp and pierce like mine .
Why should calamity be full of words ?
If so , then be not tongue-tied .
Go with me , And in the breath of bitter words let's smother My damned son that thy two sweet sons smothered .
Who intercepts my expedition ?
O , she that might have intercepted thee , By strangling thee in her accursed womb , From all the slaughters , wretch , that thou hast done .
Hid'st thou that forehead with a golden crown Where should be branded , if that right were right , The slaughter of the prince that owed that crown And the dire death of my poor sons and brothers ?
Tell me , thou villain-slave , where are my children ?
Where is gentle Rivers , Vaughan , Grey ?
Where is kind Hastings ?
Strike alarum , drums !
Let not the heavens hear these telltale women Rail on the Lord's anointed .
Strike , I say !
Either be patient and entreat me fair , Or with the clamorous report of war Thus will I drown your exclamations .
Art thou my son ?
Ay , I thank God , my father , and yourself .
Then patiently hear my impatience .
Madam , I have a touch of your condition , Which can not brook the accent of reproof .
O , let me speak !
Do then , but I'll not hear .
I will be mild and gentle in my words .
And brief , good mother , for I am in haste .
Art thou so hasty ?
I have stayed for thee , God knows , in torment and in agony .
And came I not at last to comfort you ?
What comfortable hour canst thou name , That ever graced me in thy company ?
Faith , none but Humfrey Hower , that called your Grace To breakfast once , forth of my company .
I prithee , hear me speak .
You speak too bitterly .
Hear me a word , For I shall never speak to thee again .
So .
Though far more cause , yet much less spirit to curse Abides in me .
I say amen to her .
Stay , madam .
I must talk a word with you .
I have no more sons of the royal blood For thee to slaughter .
You have a daughter called Elizabeth , Virtuous and fair , royal and gracious .
And must she die for this ?
O , let her live , And I'll corrupt her manners , stain her beauty , Slander myself as false to Edward's bed , Throw over her the veil of infamy .
So she may live unscarred of bleeding slaughter , I will confess she was not Edward's daughter .
Wrong not her birth .
She is a royal princess .
To save her life , I'll say she is not so .
And only in that safety died her brothers .
No , to their lives ill friends were contrary .
My babes were destined to a fairer death If grace had blessed thee with a fairer life .
Whose hand soever launched their tender hearts , Thy head , all indirectly , gave direction .
No doubt the murd'rous knife was dull and blunt Till it was whetted on thy stone-hard heart , To revel in the entrails of my lambs .
But that still use of grief makes wild grief tame , My tongue should to thy ears not name my boys Till that my nails were anchored in thine eyes , And I , in such a desp'rate bay of death , Like a poor bark of sails and tackling reft , Rush all to pieces on thy rocky bosom .
Madam , so thrive I in my enterprise And dangerous success of bloody wars As I intend more good to you and yours Than ever you or yours were by me harmed !
What good is covered with the face of heaven , To be discovered , that can do me good ?
The advancement of your children , gentle lady .
Up to some scaffold , there to lose their heads .
Unto the dignity and height of fortune , The high imperial type of this earth's glory .
And thou unfit for any place but hell .
Yes , one place else , if you will hear me name it .
Some dungeon .
Your bedchamber .
Ill rest betide the chamber where thou liest !
So will it , madam till I lie with you .
Be brief , lest that the process of thy kindness Last longer telling than thy kindness ' date .
Then know that from my soul I love thy daughter .
My daughter's mother thinks it with her soul .
What do you think ?
That thou dost love my daughter from thy soul .
Be not so hasty to confound my meaning .
Even he that makes her queen .
Who else should be ?
What , thou ?
How think you of it ?
How canst thou woo her ?
Madam , with all my heart .
You mock me , madam .
This is not the way To win your daughter .
There is no other way , Unless thou couldst put on some other shape And not be Richard , that hath done all this .
Say that I did all this for love of her .
Nay , then indeed she can not choose but hate thee , Having bought love with such a bloody spoil .
Look what is done can not be now amended .
Men shall deal unadvisedly sometimes , Which after-hours give leisure to repent .
If I did take the kingdom from your sons , To make amends I'll give it to your daughter .
If I have killed the issue of your womb , To quicken your increase I will beget Mine issue of your blood upon your daughter .
A grandam's name is little less in love Than is the doting title of a mother .
Your children were vexation to your youth , But mine shall be a comfort to your age .
I can not make you what amends I would ; Therefore accept such kindness as I can .
What , we have many goodly days to see !
Go then , my mother ; to thy daughter go .
What were I best to say ?
Her father's brother Would be her lord ?
Or shall I say her uncle ?
Or he that slew her brothers and her uncles ?
Under what title shall I woo for thee , That God , the law , my honor and her love Can make seem pleasing to her tender years ?
Infer fair England's peace by this alliance .
Which she shall purchase with still-lasting war .
Tell her the king , that may command , entreats , That , at her hands , which the king's King forbids .
Say she shall be a high and mighty queen .
To vail the title , as her mother doth .
Say I will love her everlastingly .
But how long shall that title "ever" last ?
Sweetly in force unto her fair life's end .
But how long fairly shall her sweet life last ?
As long as heaven and nature lengthens it .
As long as hell and Richard likes of it .
Say I , her sovereign , am her subject low .
But she , your subject , loathes such sovereignty .
Be eloquent in my behalf to her .
An honest tale speeds best being plainly told .
Then plainly to her tell my loving tale .
Plain and not honest is too harsh a style .
Your reasons are too shallow and too quick .
O no , my reasons are too deep and dead , Too deep and dead , poor infants , in their graves .
Harp not on that string , madam ; that is past .
Harp on it still shall I till heart-strings break .
Now by my George , my Garter , and my crown , Profaned , dishonored , and the third usurped .
I swear , By nothing , for this is no oath .
Then , by myself , Thyself is self-misused .
Now , by the world , 'T is full of thy foul wrongs .
My father's death , Thy life hath it dishonored .
If thou hadst feared to break an oath by Him , Th ' imperial metal circling now thy head Had graced the tender temples of my child , And both the princes had been breathing here , Which now , two tender bedfellows for dust , Thy broken faith hath made the prey for worms .
What canst thou swear by now ?
The time to come .
The children live whose fathers thou hast slaughtered , Ungoverned youth , to wail it in their age ; The parents live whose children thou hast butchered , Old barren plants , to wail it with their age .
Swear not by time to come , for that thou hast Misused ere used , by times ill-used o'erpast .
As I intend to prosper and repent , So thrive I in my dangerous affairs Of hostile arms !
Myself myself confound , Heaven and fortune bar me happy hours , Day , yield me not thy light , nor night thy rest , Be opposite all planets of good luck To my proceedings if , with dear heart's love , Immaculate devotion , holy thoughts , I tender not thy beauteous princely daughter .
In her consists my happiness and thine .
Urge the necessity and state of times , And be not peevish found in great designs .
Shall I be tempted of the devil thus ?
Ay , if the devil tempt you to do good .
Ay , if your self's remembrance wrong yourself .
Yet thou didst kill my children .
But in your daughter's womb I bury them , Where , in that nest of spicery , they will breed Selves of themselves , to your recomforture .
Shall I go win my daughter to thy will ?
And be a happy mother by the deed .
I go .
Write to me very shortly , And you shall understand from me her mind .
To our shores Throng many doubtful hollow-hearted friends , Unarmed and unresolved to beat them back .
Tis thought that Richmond is their admiral ; And there they hull , expecting but the aid Of Buckingham to welcome them ashore .
Some light-foot friend post to the duke of Norfolk , Ratcliffe , thyself , or Catesby .
Catesby , fly to the duke .
I will , my lord , with all convenient haste .
Ratcliffe , come hither .
Post to Salisbury .
O true , good Catesby .
Bid him levy straight The greatest strength and power that he can make And meet me suddenly at Salisbury .
I go .
What , may it please you , shall I do at Salisbury ?
Why , what wouldst thou do there before I go ?
Your Highness told me I should post before .
My mind is changed .
Stanley , what news with you ?
None good , my liege , to please you with the hearing , Nor none so bad but well may be reported .
Hoyday , a riddle !
Neither good nor bad .
What need'st thou run so many mile about When thou mayst tell thy tale the nearest way ?
Once more , what news ?
Richmond is on the seas .
There let him sink , and be the seas on him !
White-livered runagate , what doth he there ?
Well , as you guess ?
Stirred up by Dorset , Buckingham , and Morton , He makes for England , here to claim the crown .
It is my day , my life .
Black night o'ershade thy day , and death thy life .
Curse not thyself , fair creature ; thou art both .
I would I were , to be revenged on thee .
His better doth not breathe upon the earth .
Is the chair empty ?
Is the sword unswayed ?
Is the king dead , the empire unpossessed ?
What heir of York is there alive but we ?
And who is England's king but great York's heir ?
Then tell me , what makes he upon the seas ?
Where is thy power , then , to beat him back ?
Where be thy tenants and thy followers ?
Are they not now upon the western shore , Safe-conducting the rebels from their ships ?
Cold friends to me .
What do they in the north When they should serve their sovereign in the west ?
They have not been commanded , mighty king .
Pleaseth your Majesty to give me leave , I'll muster up my friends and meet your Grace Where and what time your Majesty shall please .
Most mighty sovereign , You have no cause to hold my friendship doubtful .
I never was nor never will be false .
Go then and muster men , but leave behind Your son George Stanley .
My gracious sovereign , now in Devonshire , As I by friends am well advertised , Sir Edward Courtney and the haughty prelate , Bishop of Exeter , his elder brother , With many more confederates are in arms .
In Kent , my liege , the Guilfords are in arms , And every hour more competitors Flock to the rebels , and their power grows strong .
My lord , the army of great Buckingham , Out on you , owls !
Nothing but songs of death .
But this good comfort bring I to your Highness : The Breton navy is dispersed by tempest .
March on , march on , since we are up in arms , If not to fight with foreign enemies , Yet to beat down these rebels here at home .
While we reason here , A royal battle might be won and lost .
Someone take order Buckingham be brought To Salisbury .
The rest march on with me .
But , tell me , where is princely Richmond now ?
At Pembroke , or at Ha'rfordwest in Wales .
Sir Walter Herbert , a renowned soldier ; Sir Gilbert Talbot , Sir William Stanley , Oxford , redoubted Pembroke , Sir James Blunt , And Rice ap Thomas , with a valiant crew , And many other of great name and worth ; And towards London they do bend their power , If by the way they be not fought withal .
Now is the winter of our discontent Made glorious summer by this son of York , And all the clouds that loured upon our house In the deep bosom of the ocean buried .
Grim-visaged war hath smoothed his wrinkled front ; And now , instead of mounting barbed steeds To fright the souls of fearful adversaries , He capers nimbly in a lady's chamber To the lascivious pleasing of a lute .
Will not King Richard let me speak with him ?
No , my good lord .
Therefore be patient .
Hastings and Edward's children , Grey and Rivers , Holy King Henry and thy fair son Edward , Vaughan , and all that have miscarried By underhand , corrupted , foul injustice , If that your moody , discontented souls Do through the clouds behold this present hour , Even for revenge mock my destruction. , This is All Souls ' Day , fellow , is it not ?
It is .
Why , then All Souls ' Day is my body's doomsday .
This is the day which , in King Edward's time , I wished might fall on me when I was found False to his children and his wife's allies .
This is the day wherein I wished to fall By the false faith of him who most I trusted .
This , this All Souls ' Day to my fearful soul Is the determined respite of my wrongs .
That high All-seer which I dallied with Hath turned my feigned prayer on my head And given in earnest what I begged in jest .
Thus doth he force the swords of wicked men To turn their own points in their masters ' bosoms .
Wrong hath but wrong , and blame the due of blame .
I doubt not but his friends will turn to us .
He hath no friends but who are friends for fear .
Which in his dearest need will fly from him .
All for our vantage .
Then , in God's name , march .
True hope is swift , and flies with swallow's wings .
Kings it makes gods , and meaner creatures kings .
My heart is ten times lighter than my looks .
My Lord of Norfolk , Here , most gracious liege .
Norfolk , we must have knocks , ha , must we not ?
We must both give and take , my loving lord .
Up with my tent ! , Here will I lie tonight .
But where tomorrow ?
Well , all's one for that .
Six or seven thousand is their utmost power .
Why , our battalia trebles that account .
Besides , the king's name is a tower of strength Which they upon the adverse party want .
Let's lack no discipline , make no delay , For , lords , tomorrow is a busy day .
My Lord of Oxford , you , Sir William Brandon , And you , Sir Walter Herbert , stay with me .
The earl of Pembroke keeps his regiment , Good Captain Blunt , bear my goodnight to him , And by the second hour in the morning Desire the earl to see me in my tent .
Unless I have mista'en his colors much , Which well I am assured I have not done , His regiment lies half a mile , at least , South from the mighty power of the king .
If without peril it be possible , Sweet Blunt , make some good means to speak with him , And give him from me this most needful note .
Upon my life , my lord , I'll undertake it .
He lives that loves thee better than he could .
Name him .
Plantagenet .
Why , that was he .
The selfsame name , but one of better nature .
Where is he ?
Here .
Why dost thou spit at me ?
Would it were mortal poison for thy sake .
Never came poison from so sweet a place .
Never hung poison on a fouler toad .
Out of my sight !
Thou dost infect mine eyes .
Thine eyes , sweet lady , have infected mine .
Would they were basilisks to strike thee dead .
Good night , good Captain Blunt .
Come , gentlemen , Let us consult upon tomorrow's business Into my tent .
The dew is raw and cold .
What is "t o"clock ?
It's suppertime , my lord .
It's nine o'clock .
I will not sup tonight .
Give me some ink and paper .
What , is my beaver easier than it was ?
And all my armor laid into my tent ?
Good Norfolk , hie thee to thy charge .
I go , my lord .
Stir with the lark tomorrow , gentle Norfolk .
I warrant you , my lord .
Catesby .
My lord .
My lord .
Sawst thou the melancholy Lord Northumberland ?
Thomas the earl of Surrey and himself , Much about cockshut time , from troop to troop Went through the army cheering up the soldiers .
So , I am satisfied .
Set it down .
Is ink and paper ready ?
It is , my lord .
Ratcliffe , about the mid of night come to my tent And help to arm me .
Leave me , I say .
Fortune and victory sit on thy helm !
All comfort that the dark night can afford Be to thy person , noble father-in-law .
Tell me , how fares our loving mother ?
I , by attorney , bless thee from thy mother , Who prays continually for Richmond's good .
In brief , for so the season bids us be , Prepare thy battle early in the morning , And put thy fortune to the arbitrament Of bloody strokes and mortal-staring war .
I , as I may , that which I would I can not , , With best advantage will deceive the time , And aid thee in this doubtful shock of arms .
But on thy side I may not be too forward , Lest , being seen , thy brother , tender George , Be executed in his father's sight .
Farewell .
The leisure and the fearful time Cuts off the ceremonious vows of love And ample interchange of sweet discourse , Which so-long-sundered friends should dwell upon .
God give us leisure for these rites of love !
Once more , adieu .
Be valiant , and speed well .
Once more , good night , kind lords and gentlemen .
O Thou , whose captain I account myself , Look on my forces with a gracious eye .
Make us thy ministers of chastisement , That we may praise thee in the victory !
To thee I do commend my watchful soul , Ere I let fall the windows of mine eyes .
Sleeping and waking , O , defend me still !
Think upon Vaughan , and with guilty fear Let fall thy lance .
Despair , and die !
Edward's unhappy sons do bid thee flourish .
Think on Lord Hastings .
Despair and die !
Thy adversary's wife doth pray for thee .
The last was I that felt thy tyranny .
O , in the battle think on Buckingham , And die in terror of thy guiltiness .
Dream on , dream on , of bloody deeds and death .
But cheer thy heart , and be thou not dismayed .
Give me another horse !
Bind up my wounds !
Have mercy , Jesu ! , Soft , I did but dream .
O coward conscience , how dost thou afflict me !
What do I fear ?
Myself ?
There's none else by .
Richard loves Richard ; that is , I and I .
Is there a murderer here ?
No .
Yes , I am .
Then fly !
What , from myself ?
Alack , I love myself .
Wherefore ?
For any good That I myself have done unto myself ?
O , no !
Alas , I rather hate myself For hateful deeds committed by myself .
I am a villain .
Fool , of thyself speak well .
Fool , do not flatter .
My lord .
Zounds , who is there ?
Ratcliffe , my lord , 'tis I .
The early village cock Hath twice done salutation to the morn .
Your friends are up and buckle on their armor .
O Ratcliffe , I have dreamed a fearful dream !
What think'st thou , will our friends prove all true ?
No doubt , my lord .
By the apostle Paul , shadows tonight Have struck more terror to the soul of Richard Than can the substance of ten thousand soldiers Armed in proof and led by shallow Richmond .
Tis not yet near day .
Come , go with me ; Under our tents I'll play the eavesdropper To see if any mean to shrink from me .
Good morrow , Richmond .
Cry mercy , lords and watchful gentlemen , That you have ta'en a tardy sluggard here .
How have you slept , my lord ?
The sweetest sleep and fairest-boding dreams That ever entered in a drowsy head Have I since your departure had , my lords .
Methought their souls whose bodies Richard murdered Came to my tent and cried on victory .
I promise you , my soul is very jocund In the remembrance of so fair a dream .
How far into the morning is it , lords ?
Upon the stroke of four .
Why , then 'tis time to arm and give direction .
God and our good cause fight upon our side .
The prayers of holy saints and wronged souls , Like high-reared bulwarks , stand before our faces .
Richard except , those whom we fight against Had rather have us win than him they follow .
For what is he they follow ?
If you do sweat to put a tyrant down , You sleep in peace , the tyrant being slain .
If you do fight against your country's foes , Your country's fat shall pay your pains the hire .
If you do fight in safeguard of your wives , Your wives shall welcome home the conquerors .
If you do free your children from the sword , Your children's children quits it in your age .
Then , in the name of God and all these rights , Advance your standards .
I would they were , that I might die at once , For now they kill me with a living death .
I never sued to friend , nor enemy ; My tongue could never learn sweet smoothing word .
If thy revengeful heart can not forgive , Lo , here I lend thee this sharp-pointed sword , Which if thou please to hide in this true breast And let the soul forth that adoreth thee , I lay it naked to the deadly stroke And humbly beg the death upon my knee .
Nay , do not pause ; for I did kill King Henry , But 'twas thy beauty that provoked me .
What said Northumberland as touching Richmond ?
That he was never trained up in arms .
He said the truth .
And what said Surrey then ?
He smiled and said "The better for our purpose." He was in the right , and so indeed it is .
Tell the clock there .
Give me a calendar .
Not I , my lord .
Ratcliffe !
My lord .
The sun will not be seen today .
The sky doth frown and lour upon our army .
I would these dewy tears were from the ground .
Not shine today ?
Arm , arm , my lord .
The foe vaunts in the field .
Come , bustle , bustle .
John Duke of Norfolk , Thomas Earl of Surrey , Shall have the leading of this foot and horse .
They thus directed , we will follow In the main battle , whose puissance on either side Shall be well winged with our chiefest horse .
This , and Saint George to boot , What think'st thou , Norfolk ?
A good direction , warlike sovereign .
This found I on my tent this morning .
Hark !
I hear their drum .
Amaze the welkin with your broken staves ,
What says Lord Stanley ?
Will he bring his power ?
My lord , he doth deny to come .
Off with his son George's head !
My lord , the enemy is past the marsh .
After the battle let George Stanley die .
Upon them !
Victory sits on our helms .
Rescue , my lord of Norfolk , rescue , rescue !
The king enacts more wonders than a man , Daring an opposite to every danger .
His horse is slain , and all on foot he fights , Seeking for Richmond in the throat of death .
Rescue , fair lord , or else the day is lost !
A horse , a horse , my kingdom for a horse !
Withdraw , my lord .
I'll help you to a horse .
God and your arms be praised , victorious friends !
Great God of heaven , say amen to all !
But tell me , is young George Stanley living ?
He is , my lord , and safe in Leicester town , Whither , if it please you , we may now withdraw us .
John Duke of Norfolk , Walter , Lord Ferrers , Sir Robert Brakenbury , and Sir William Brandon .
And then , as we have ta'en the sacrament , We will unite the white rose and the red .
Smile heaven upon this fair conjunction , That long have frowned upon their enmity .
What traitor hears me and says not "Amen ? " England hath long been mad and scarred herself .
O , now let Richmond and Elizabeth , The true succeeders of each royal house , By God's fair ordinance conjoin together , And let their heirs , God , if thy will be so .
Abate the edge of traitors , gracious Lord , That would reduce these bloody days again , And make poor England weep in streams of blood !
Let them not live to taste this land's increase , That would with treason wound this fair land's peace .
Now civil wounds are stopped , peace lives again .
That she may long live here , God say amen .
Take up the sword again , or take up me .
Arise , dissembler .
Though I wish thy death , I will not be the executioner .
I have already .
That was in thy rage .
Speak it again and , even with the word , This hand , which for thy love did kill thy love , Shall for thy love kill a far truer love .
To both their deaths shalt thou be accessory .
I would I knew thy heart .
Tis figured in my tongue .
I fear me both are false .
Then never man was man true .
Well , well , put up your sword .
Say then my peace is made .
That shall you know hereafter .
But shall I live in hope ?
All men I hope live so .
Vouchsafe to wear this ring .
Wear both of them , for both of them are thine .
And if thy poor devoted servant may But beg one favor at thy gracious hand , Thou dost confirm his happiness forever .
What is it ?
That it would please you leave these sad designs To him that hath more cause to be a mourner , And presently repair to Crosby House , Where , after I have solemnly interred At Chertsey monast'ry this noble king And wet his grave with my repentant tears , I will with all expedient duty see you .
For divers unknown reasons , I beseech you , Grant me this boon .
With all my heart , and much it joys me too To see you are become so penitent. , Tressel and Berkeley , go along with me .
Bid me farewell .
Sirs , take up the corse .
Towards Chertsey , noble lord ?
No , to Whitefriars .
There attend my coming .
Was ever woman in this humor wooed ?
Was ever woman in this humor won ?
I'll have her , but I will not keep her long .
And yet to win her , all the world to nothing !
Ha !
Hath she forgot already that brave prince , Edward , her lord , whom I some three months since Stabbed in my angry mood at Tewkesbury ?
A sweeter and a Lovellier gentleman , Framed in the prodigality of nature , Young , valiant , wise , and , no doubt , right royal , The spacious world can not again afford .
And will she yet abase her eyes on me , That cropped the golden prime of this sweet prince And made her widow to a woeful bed ?
On me , whose all not equals Edward's moiety ?
On me , that halts and am misshapen thus ?
My dukedom to a beggarly denier , I do mistake my person all this while !
Upon my life , she finds , although I can not , Myself to be a marv'lous proper man .
I'll be at charges for a looking glass And entertain a score or two of tailors To study fashions to adorn my body .
Since I am crept in favor with myself , I will maintain it with some little cost .
But first I'll turn yon fellow in his grave And then return lamenting to my love .
Shine out , fair sun , till I have bought a glass , That I may see my shadow as I pass .
Have patience , madam .
There's no doubt his majesty Will soon recover his accustomed health .
If he were dead , what would betide on me ?
Ah , he is young , and his minority Is put unto the trust of Richard Gloucester , A man that loves not me nor none of you .
Is it concluded that he shall be Protector ?
It is determined , not concluded yet ; But so it must be if the king miscarry .
God make your Majesty joyful , as you have been .
Saw you the king today , my lord of Derby ?
But now the duke of Buckingham and I Are come from visiting his majesty .
What likelihood of his amendment , lords ?
Madam , good hope .
His grace speaks cheerfully .
God grant him health .
Did you confer with him ?
Ay , madam .
Would all were well , but that will never be .
They do me wrong , and I will not endure it !
Who is it that complains unto the king That I , forsooth , am stern and love them not ?
Can not a plain man live and think no harm , But thus his simple truth must be abused With silken , sly , insinuating jacks ?
To whom in all this presence speaks your Grace ?
To thee , that hast nor honesty nor grace .
When have I injured thee ?
Or any of your faction ?
A plague upon you all !
His royal grace , Whom God preserve better than you would wish , Can not be quiet scarce a breathing while But you must trouble him with lewd complaints .
Brother of Gloucester , you mistake the matter .
I can not tell .
The world is grown so bad That wrens make prey where eagles dare not perch .
Come , come , we know your meaning , brother Gloucester .
You envy my advancement , and my friends ' .
God grant we never may have need of you .
Meantime God grants that we have need of you .
Our brother is imprisoned by your means , Myself disgraced , and the nobility Held in contempt , while great promotions Are daily given to ennoble those That scarce some two days since were worth a noble .
By Him that raised me to this careful height From that contented hap which I enjoyed , I never did incense his majesty Against the duke of Clarence , but have been An earnest advocate to plead for him .
And therefore , since I can not prove a lover To entertain these fair well-spoken days , I am determined to prove a villain And hate the idle pleasures of these days .
Plots have I laid , inductions dangerous , By drunken prophecies , libels and dreams , To set my brother Clarence and the king In deadly hate , the one against the other ; And if King Edward be as true and just As I am subtle , false , and treacherous , This day should Clarence closely be mewed up About a prophecy which says that "G" Of Edward's heirs the murderer shall be .
His majesty , Tend'ring my person's safety , hath appointed This conduct to convey me to the Tower .
Upon what cause ?
Because my name is George .
Alack , my lord , that fault is none of yours .
He should , for that , commit your godfathers .
O , belike his majesty hath some intent That you shall be new christened in the Tower .
But what's the matter , Clarence ?
May I know ?
What may she not ?
I wis , your grandam had a worser match .
My Lord of Gloucester , I have too long borne Your blunt upbraidings and your bitter scoffs .
By heaven , I will acquaint his majesty With those gross taunts that oft I have endured .
I had rather be a country servant-maid Than a great queen with this condition , To be so baited , scorned , and stormed at .
Small joy have I in being England's queen .
So should we you , if you should be our king .
If I should be ?
I had rather be a peddler .
Hear me , you wrangling pirates , that fall out In sharing that which you have pilled from me !
Which of you trembles not that looks on me ?
Foul , wrinkled witch , what mak'st thou in my sight ?
But repetition of what thou hast marred .
That will I make before I let thee go .
Wert thou not banished on pain of death ?
I was , but I do find more pain in banishment Than death can yield me here by my abode .
The sorrow that I have by right is yours , And all the pleasures you usurp are mine .
O , 'twas the foulest deed to slay that babe , And the most merciless that e'er was heard of !
Tyrants themselves wept when it was reported .
What , were you snarling all before I came , Ready to catch each other by the throat , And turn you all your hatred now on me ?
Thyself a queen , for me that was a queen , Outlive thy glory , like my wretched self .
Have done thy charm , thou hateful , withered hag .
And leave out thee ?
Stay , dog , for thou shalt hear me .
The worm of conscience still begnaw thy soul .
Richard !
Ha ?
I call thee not .
I cry thee mercy , then , for I did think That thou hadst called me all these bitter names .
Why , so I did , but looked for no reply .
O , let me make the period to my curse !
Tis done by me , and ends in "Margaret." Thus have you breathed your curse against yourself .
Poor painted queen , vain flourish of my fortune , Why strew'st thou sugar on that bottled spider , Whose deadly web ensnareth thee about ?
The day will come that thou shalt wish for me To help thee curse that poisonous bunch-backed toad .
False-boding woman , end thy frantic curse , Lest to thy harm thou move our patience .
Foul shame upon you , you have all moved mine .
Were you well served , you would be taught your duty .
To serve me well , you all should do me duty : Teach me to be your queen , and you my subjects .
O , serve me well , and teach yourselves that duty !
They that stand high have many blasts to shake them , And if they fall , they dash themselves to pieces .
Good counsel , marry .
Learn it , learn it , marquess .
It touches you , my lord , as much as me .
And turns the sun to shade .
Urge neither charity nor shame to me .
Uncharitably with me have you dealt , And shamefully my hopes by you are butchered .
My charity is outrage , life my shame , And in that shame still live my sorrows ' rage .
Have done , have done .
Thy garments are not spotted with our blood , Nor thou within the compass of my curse .
Nor no one here , for curses never pass The lips of those that breathe them in the air .
What doth she say , my lord of Buckingham ?
Nothing that I respect , my gracious lord .
What , dost thou scorn me for my gentle counsel , And soothe the devil that I warn thee from ?
My hair doth stand an end to hear her curses .
And so doth mine .
I muse why she's at liberty .
I can not blame her .
I never did her any , to my knowledge .
Yet you have all the vantage of her wrong .
Marry , as for Clarence , he is well repaid ; He is franked up to fatting for his pains .
God pardon them that are the cause thereof .
So do I ever For had I cursed now , I had cursed myself .
Yea , Richard , when I know , for I protest As yet I do not .
But , as I can learn , He hearkens after prophecies and dreams , And from the crossrow plucks the letter And says a wizard told him that by "G" His issue disinherited should be .
And for my name of George begins with It follows in his thought that I am he .
Why , this it is when men are ruled by women .
Tis not the king that sends you to the Tower .
My Lady Grey his wife , Clarence , 'tis she That tempers him to this extremity .
Madam , his majesty doth call for you , , And for your Grace , , and yours , my gracious lords .
We wait upon your Grace .
I do the wrong , and first begin to brawl .
Now they believe it and withal whet me To be revenged on Rivers , Dorset , Grey ; But then I sigh and , with a piece of scripture , Tell them that God bids us do good for evil ; And thus I clothe my naked villainy With odd old ends stolen out of Holy Writ , And seem a saint when most I play the devil .
But , soft !
Are you now going to dispatch this thing ?
We are , my lord , and come to have the warrant That we may be admitted where he is .
Well thought upon .
I have it here about me .
Tut , tut , my lord , we will not stand to prate .
Talkers are no good doers .
Be assured We go to use our hands and not our tongues .
Your eyes drop millstones , when fools ' eyes drop tears .
I like you lads .
Go , go , dispatch .
We will , my noble lord .
Why looks your grace so heavily today ?
What was your dream , my lord ?
I pray you tell me .
Methoughts that I had broken from the Tower And was embarked to cross to Burgundy , And in my company my brother Gloucester , Who from my cabin tempted me to walk Upon the hatches .
Thence we looked toward England And cited up a thousand fearful times , During the wars of York and Lancaster That had befall'n us .
O Lord , methought what pain it was to drown , What dreadful noise of waters in my ears , What sights of ugly death within my eyes .
Methoughts I saw a thousand fearful wracks , A thousand men that fishes gnawed upon , Wedges of gold , great anchors , heaps of pearl , Inestimable stones , unvalued jewels , All scattered in the bottom of the sea .
Had you such leisure in the time of death To gaze upon the secrets of the deep ?
Methought I had , and often did I strive To yield the ghost , but still the envious flood Stopped in my soul and would not let it forth To find the empty , vast , and wand'ring air , But smothered it within my panting bulk , Who almost burst to belch it in the sea .
I passed , methought , the melancholy flood , With that sour ferryman which poets write of , Unto the kingdom of perpetual night .
The first that there did greet my stranger-soul Was my great father-in-law , renowned Warwick , Who spake aloud , "What scourge for perjury Can this dark monarchy afford false Clarence ? " And so he vanished .
No marvel , lord , though it affrighted you .
I am afraid , methinks , to hear you tell it .
Ah keeper , keeper , I have done those things , That now give evidence against my soul , For Edward's sake , and see how he requites me. , O God , if my deep prayers can not appease thee , But thou wilt be avenged on my misdeeds , Yet execute thy wrath in me alone !
O , spare my guiltless wife and my poor children ! , Keeper , I prithee sit by me awhile .
My soul is heavy , and I fain would sleep .
I will , my lord .
God give your Grace good rest .
Sorrow breaks seasons and reposing hours , Makes the night morning , and the noontide night .
Princes have but their titles for their glories , An outward honor for an inward toil ,
What wouldst thou , fellow ?
And how cam'st thou hither ?
I would speak with Clarence , and I came hither on my legs .
What , so brief ?
Tis better , sir , to be brief than tedious. , Let him see our commission , and talk no more .
I am in this commanded to deliver The noble duke of Clarence to your hands .
There lies the duke asleep , and there the keys .
You may , sir .
Tis a point of wisdom .
Fare you well .
What , shall I stab him as he sleeps ?
No .
He'll say 'twas done cowardly , when he wakes .
Why , he shall never wake until the great Judgment Day .
Why , then he'll say we stabbed him sleeping .
The urging of that word "judgment" hath bred a kind of remorse in me .
What , art thou afraid ?
Not to kill him , having a warrant , but to be damned for killing him , from the which no warrant can defend me .
I thought thou hadst been resolute .
So I am , to let him live .
I'll back to the duke of Gloucester and tell him so .
Nay , I prithee stay a little .
I hope this passionate humor of mine will change .
It was wont to hold me but while one tells twenty .
How dost thou feel thyself now ?
Faith , some certain dregs of conscience are yet within me .
Remember our reward when the deed's done .
Zounds , he dies !
I had forgot the reward .
Where's thy conscience now ?
O , in the duke of Gloucester's purse .
So when he opens his purse to give us our reward , thy conscience flies out .
Tis no matter .
Let it go .
There's few or none will entertain it .
What if it come to thee again ?
I'll not meddle with it .
Tis a blushing , shamefaced spirit that mutinies in a man's bosom .
I am strong-framed .
He can not prevail with me .
Spoke like a tall man that respects thy reputation .
Come , shall we fall to work ?
Take him on the costard with the hilts of thy sword , and then throw him into the malmsey butt in the next room .
O excellent device , and make a sop of him .
Strike !
No , we'll reason with him .
Where art thou , keeper ?
Give me a cup of wine .
You shall have wine enough , my lord , anon .
In God's name , what art thou ?
A man , as you are .
But not , as I am , royal .
Nor you , as we are , loyal .
Thy voice is thunder , but thy looks are humble .
My voice is now the king's , my looks mine own .
Your eyes do menace me .
Why look you pale ?
Who sent you hither ?
Wherefore do you come ?
To , to , to , To murder me ?
Ay , ay .
You scarcely have the hearts to tell me so , And therefore can not have the hearts to do it .
Wherein , my friends , have I offended you ?
Offended us you have not , but the king .
I shall be reconciled to him again .
Never , my lord .
Therefore prepare to die .
Are you drawn forth among a world of men To slay the innocent ?
What is my offense ?
Where is the evidence that doth accuse me ?
What lawful quest have given their verdict up Unto the frowning judge ?
Or who pronounced The bitter sentence of poor Clarence ' death Before I be convict by course of law ?
To threaten me with death is most unlawful .
I charge you , as you hope to have redemption , By Christ's dear blood shed for our grievous sins , That you depart , and lay no hands on me .
What we will do , we do upon command .
Even so .
An please your Worship , Brakenbury , You may partake of anything we say .
We speak no treason , man .
We say the king Is wise and virtuous , and his noble queen Well struck in years , fair , and not jealous .
How say you , sir ?
Can you deny all this ?
With this , my lord , myself have naught to do .
Her husband , knave .
Wouldst thou betray me ?
I do beseech your Grace to pardon me , and withal Forbear your conference with the noble duke .
And he that hath commanded is our king .
And that same vengeance doth He hurl on thee For false forswearing and for murder too .
Whom thou wert sworn to cherish and defend .
How canst thou urge God's dreadful law to us When thou hast broke it in such dear degree ?
For whose sake did I that ill deed ?
For Edward , for my brother , for his sake .
If God will be avenged for this deed , O , know you yet He doth it publicly !
Take not the quarrel from His powerful arm ; He needs no indirect or lawless course To cut off those that have offended Him .
My brother's love , the devil , and my rage .
I am his brother , and I love him well .
You are deceived .
Your brother Gloucester hates you .
O , no , he loves me , and he holds me dear .
Go you to him from me .
Ay , so we will .
Tell him , when that our princely father York Blessed his three sons with his victorious arm , He little thought of this divided friendship .
Bid Gloucester think of this , and he will weep .
Ay , millstones , as he lessoned us to weep .
Right , as snow in harvest .
Come , you deceive yourself .
Tis he that sends us to destroy you here .
Why , so he doth , when he delivers you From this earth's thralldom to the joys of heaven .
Make peace with God , for you must die , my lord .
Have you that holy feeling in your souls To counsel me to make my peace with God , And art you yet to your own souls so blind That thou will war with God by murd'ring me ?
O sirs , consider : they that set you on To do this deed will hate you for the deed .
Relent , and save your souls .
Which of you , if you were a prince's son Being pent from liberty , as I am now , If two such murderers as yourselves came to you , Would not entreat for life ?
Ay , you would beg , Were you in my distress .
Relent ?
No .
Tis cowardly and womanish .
Look behind you , my lord .
Take that , and that .
How now ?
What mean'st thou , that thou help'st me not ?
By heavens , the duke shall know how slack you have been .
I would he knew that I had saved his brother .
So do not I .
Go , coward as thou art .
Well , I'll go hide the body in some hole Till that the duke give order for his burial .
And when I have my meed , I will away , For this will out , and then I must not stay .
Here comes your father .
Never make denial .
I must and will have Katherine to my wife .
Now , Signior Petruchio , how speed you with my daughter ?
How but well , sir ?
Why , how now , daughter Katherine ?
In your dumps ?
Call you me daughter ?
Father , 'tis thus : yourself and all the world That talked of her have talked amiss of her .
I'll see thee hanged on Sunday first .
Hark , Petruchio : she says she'll see thee hanged first .
Is this your speeding ?
Nay , then , good night our part .
Be patient , gentlemen .
I choose her for myself .
If she and I be pleased , what's that to you ?
Tis bargained 'twixt us twain , being alone , That she shall still be curst in company .
I tell you , 'tis incredible to believe How much she loves me .
O , the kindest Kate !
O , you are novices !
Tis a world to see , How tame , when men and women are alone , A meacock wretch can make the curstest shrew. , Give me thy hand , Kate .
I will unto Venice To buy apparel 'gainst the wedding day .
God send you joy , Petruchio .
Tis a match .
Amen , say we .
We will be witnesses .
Father , and wife , and gentlemen , adieu .
I will to Venice .
Sunday comes apace .
We will be married o ' Sunday .
Was ever match clapped up so suddenly ?
Twill bring you gain or perish on the seas .
The gain I seek is quiet in the match .
No doubt but he hath got a quiet catch .
But now , Baptista , to your younger daughter .
Now is the day we long have looked for .
I am your neighbor , and was suitor first .
Youngling , thou canst not love so dear as I. Graybeard , thy love doth freeze .
But thine doth fry .
Skipper , stand back .
Tis age that nourisheth .
Content you , gentlemen .
I will compound this strife .
First , as you know , my house within the city Is richly furnished with plate and gold , Basins and ewers to lave her dainty hands ; My hangings all of Tyrian tapestry , In ivory coffers I have stuffed my crowns , In cypress chests my arras counterpoints , Costly apparel , tents , and canopies , Fine linen , Turkey cushions bossed with pearl , Valance of Venice gold in needlework , Pewter and brass , and all things that belong To house or housekeeping .
Then , at my farm I have a hundred milch-kine to the pail , Six score fat oxen standing in my stalls , And all things answerable to this portion .
Two thousand ducats by the year of land !
Nay , I have offered all , I have no more , And she can have no more than all I have .
I must confess your offer is the best , And , let your father make her the assurance , She is your own ; else , you must pardon me .
If you should die before him , where's her dower ?
And may not young men die as well as old ?
Well , gentlemen , I am thus resolved : On Sunday next , you know My daughter Katherina is to be married .
I think 'twas Soto that your Honor means .
Tis very true .
Thou didst it excellent .
There is a lord will hear you play tonight ; But I am doubtful of your modesties , Lest over-eyeing of his odd behavior , For yet his Honor never heard a play , You break into some merry passion And so offend him .
Go , sirrah , take them to the buttery And give them friendly welcome every one .
Adieu , good neighbor .
Sirrah young gamester , your father were a fool To give thee all and in his waning age Set foot under thy table .
Tut , a toy !
An old Italian fox is not so kind , my boy .
A vengeance on your crafty withered hide !
Fathers commonly Do get their children .
But in this case of wooing , A child shall get a sire , if I fail not of my cunning .
His lecture will be done ere you have tuned .
Where left we last ?
Here , madam : Conster them .
Now let me see if I can conster it .
I must believe my master ; else , I promise you , I should be arguing still upon that doubt .
But let it rest. , Now , Litio , to you .
Good master , take it not unkindly , pray , That I have been thus pleasant with you both .
Call you this "gamut" ?
Tut , I like it not .
Old fashions please me best .
Mistress , your father prays you leave your books And help to dress your sister's chamber up .
You know tomorrow is the wedding day .
Farewell , sweet masters both .
I must be gone .
But I have cause to pry into this pedant .
Methinks he looks as though he were in love .
No shame but mine .
Now must the world point at poor Katherine And say , "Lo , there is mad Petruchio's wife , If it would please him come and marry her ! " Upon my life , Petruchio means but well , Whatever fortune stays him from his word : Though he be blunt , I know him passing wise ; Though he be merry , yet withal he's honest .
Would Katherine had never seen him , though !
Go , girl .
I can not blame thee now to weep , For such an injury would vex a very saint , Much more a shrew of thy impatient humor .
Master , master !
News , old news , and such news as you never heard of !
Is it new and old too ?
How may that be ?
Why , is it not news to hear of Petruchio's coming ?
Is he come ?
Why , no , sir .
What then ?
He is coming .
When will he be here ?
When he stands where I am and sees you there .
Who comes with him ?
A monster , a very monster in apparel , and not like a Christian footboy or a gentleman's lackey .
I am glad he's come , howsoe'er he comes .
Why , sir , he comes not .
Didst thou not say he comes ?
Who ?
That Petruchio came ?
Ay , that Petruchio came .
No , sir , I say his horse comes , with him on his back .
Why , that's all one .
Nay , by Saint Jamy , I hold you a penny , A horse and a man Is more than one And yet not many .
You are welcome , sir .
See this dispatched with all the haste thou canst : Anon I'll give thee more instructions .
I know the boy will well usurp the grace , Voice , gait , and action of a gentlewoman .
I long to hear him call the drunkard "husband , " And how my men will stay themselves from laughter When they do homage to this simple peasant .
I'll in to counsel them .
Where is my love ?
Why , sir , you know this is your wedding day .
Tedious it were to tell and harsh to hear .
But where is Kate ?
I stay too long from her .
See not your bride in these unreverent robes .
Go to my chamber , put on clothes of mine .
Not I , believe me .
Thus I'll visit her .
But thus , I trust , you will not marry her .
Good sooth , even thus .
Could I repair what she will wear in me As I can change these poor accoutrements , 'Twere well for Kate and better for myself .
But what a fool am I to chat with you , When I should bid good morrow to my bride And seal the title with a lovely kiss !
He hath some meaning in his mad attire .
We will persuade him , be it possible , To put on better ere he go to church .
I'll after him , and see the event of this .
So shall you quietly enjoy your hope And marry sweet Bianca with consent .
We'll overreach the graybeard , Gremio , The narrow-prying father , Minola , The quaint musician , amorous Litio , All for my master's sake , Lucentio .
Signior Gremio , came you from the church ?
As willingly as e'er I came from school .
A bridegroom , say you ?
Why , he's a devil , a devil , a very fiend .
Tut , she's a lamb , a dove , a fool to him !
Now take them up , " quoth he , "if any list." Trembled and shook , for why he stamped and swore As if the vicar meant to cozen him .
But after many ceremonies done , He calls for wine .
This done , he took the bride about the neck And kissed her lips with such a clamorous smack That at the parting all the church did echo .
Such a mad marriage never was before .
Hark , hark !
I hear the minstrels play .
Is 't possible you will away tonight ?
Make it no wonder .
If you knew my business , You would entreat me rather go than stay .
And , honest company , I thank you all , That have beheld me give away myself To this most patient , sweet and virtuous wife .
Let me entreat you .
It can not be .
Let me entreat you .
I am content .
Are you content to stay ?
I am content you shall entreat me stay , But yet not stay , entreat me how you can .
Now , if you love me , stay .
Grumio , my horse .
Ay , sir , they be ready .
The oats have eaten the horses .
The door is open , sir .
There lies your way .
For me , I'll not be gone till I please myself .
O Kate , content thee .
Prithee , be not angry .
I will be angry .
What hast thou to do ? , Father , be quiet .
He shall stay my leisure .
Ay , marry , sir , now it begins to work .
Gentlemen , forward to the bridal dinner .
I see a woman may be made a fool If she had not a spirit to resist .
I'll buckler thee against a million .
Nay , let them go , a couple of quiet ones .
Went they not quickly , I should die with laughing .
That , being mad herself , she's madly mated .
Neighbors and friends , though bride and bridegroom wants For to supply the places at the table , You know there wants no junkets at the feast .
She shall , Lucentio .
Come , gentlemen , let's go .
Fie , fie on all tired jades , on all mad masters , and all foul ways !
Was ever man so beaten ?
Was ever man so 'rayed ?
Was ever man so weary ?
I am sent before to make a fire , and they are coming after to warm them .
Now , were not I a little pot and soon hot , my very lips might freeze to my teeth , my tongue to the roof of my mouth , my heart in my belly , ere I should come by a fire to thaw me .
But I with blowing the fire shall warm myself .
Who is that calls so coldly ?
A piece of ice .
If thou doubt it , thou mayst slide from my shoulder to my heel with no greater a run but my head and my neck .
A fire , good Curtis .
Is my master and his wife coming , Grumio ?
Oh , ay , Curtis , ay , and therefore fire , fire .
Cast on no water .
Is she so hot a shrew as she's reported ?
She was , good Curtis , before this frost .
Why , thy horn is a foot , and so long am I , at the least .
I prithee , good Grumio , tell me , how goes the world ?
Do thy duty , and have thy duty , for my master and mistress are almost frozen to death .
There's fire ready .
And therefore , good Grumio , the news .
Why , therefore fire , for I have caught extreme cold .
Where's the cook ?
Is supper ready , the house trimmed , rushes strewed , cobwebs swept , the servingmen in their new fustian , their white stockings , and every officer his wedding garment on ?
Be the Jacks fair within , the Jills fair without , the carpets laid , and everything in order ?
For God's sake , a pot of small ale .
Will 't please your Honor taste of these conserves ?
What raiment will your Honor wear today ?
I am Christophero Sly .
All ready .
And therefore , I pray thee , news .
First , know my horse is tired , my master and mistress fallen out .
How ?
Out of their saddles into the dirt , and thereby hangs a tale .
Let's ha ' 't , good Grumio .
Lend thine ear .
Here .
There !
This 'tis to feel a tale , not to hear a tale .
And therefore 'tis called a sensible tale .
And this cuff was but to knock at your ear and beseech list'ning .
Now I begin : Imprimis , we came down a foul hill , my master riding behind my mistress , Both of one horse ?
What's that to thee ?
Why , a horse .
Tell thou the tale !
Ay , and that thou and the proudest of you all shall find when he comes home .
But what talk I of this ?
Call forth Nathaniel , Joseph , Nicholas , Philip , Walter , Sugarsop , and the rest .
Let their heads be slickly combed , their blue coats brushed , and their garters of an indifferent knit .
Let them curtsy with their left legs , and not presume to touch a hair of my master's horse-tail till they kiss their hands .
Are they all ready ?
They are .
Call them forth .
Why , she hath a face of her own .
Who knows not that ?
Thou , it seems , that calls for company to countenance her .
I call them forth to credit her .
Why , she comes to borrow nothing of them .
Welcome home , Grumio .
How now , Grumio ?
What , Grumio !
Fellow Grumio !
How now , old lad ?
E'en at hand , alighted by this .
Where be these knaves ?
Here , here , sir !
Here , sir !
Here , sir !
Here , sir !
Here , sir !
Here , sir ! " You loggerheaded and unpolished grooms !
Where is the foolish knave I sent before ?
Here , sir , as foolish as I was before .
You peasant swain !
You whoreson malt-horse drudge !
Did I not bid thee meet me in the park And bring along these rascal knaves with thee ?
Nathaniel's coat , sir , was not fully made , And Gabriel's pumps were all unpinked i ' th ' heel .
There was no link to color Peter's hat , And Walter's dagger was not come from sheathing .
There were none fine but Adam , Rafe , and Gregory .
Go , rascals , go , and fetch my supper in .
One , Kate , that you must kiss and be acquainted with. , Where are my slippers ?
Shall I have some water ? , Come , Kate , and wash , and welcome heartily. , You whoreson villain !
Will you let it fall ?
Patience , I pray you !
Twas a fault unwilling .
Will you give thanks , sweet Kate , or else shall I ? , What's this ?
Mutton ?
Ay .
Who brought it ?
I .
What dogs are these !
Where is the rascal cook ?
How durst you , villains , bring it from the dresser And serve it thus to me that love it not ?
There , take it to you , trenchers , cups , and all !
I pray you , husband , be not so disquiet .
The meat was well , if you were so contented .
I tell thee , Kate , 'twas burnt and dried away .
Come , I will bring thee to thy bridal chamber .
Peter , didst ever see the like ?
He kills her in her own humor .
Where is he ?
Away , away , for he is coming hither !
Thus have I politicly begun my reign , And 'tis my hope to end successfully .
My falcon now is sharp and passing empty , And , till she stoop , she must not be full-gorged , For then she never looks upon her lure .
Another way I have to man my haggard , To make her come and know her keeper's call .
That is , to watch her , as we watch these kites That bate and beat and will not be obedient .
She ate no meat today , nor none shall eat .
Last night she slept not , nor tonight she shall not .
As with the meat , some undeserved fault I'll find about the making of the bed , And here I'll fling the pillow , there the bolster , This way the coverlet , another way the sheets .
And , in conclusion , she shall watch all night , And if she chance to nod I'll rail and brawl , And with the clamor keep her still awake .
He that knows better how to tame a shrew , Now let him speak ; 'tis charity to show .
Is 't possible , friend Litio , that mistress Bianca Doth fancy any other but Lucentio ?
What , master , read you ?
First resolve me that .
And may you prove , sir , master of your art .
I tell thee , Litio , this is wonderful !
Mistake no more .
Know , sir , that I am called Hortensio .
See how they kiss and court !
Fie on her !
See how beastly she doth court him !
Would all the world but he had quite forsworn !
For me , that I may surely keep mine oath , I will be married to a wealthy widow , Ere three days pass , which hath as long loved me As I have loved this proud disdainful haggard .
And so farewell , Signior Lucentio .
Kindness in women , not their beauteous looks , Shall win my love , and so I take my leave , In resolution as I swore before .
What , would you make me mad ?
Am not I Christopher Sly , old Sly's son of Burton Heath , by birth a peddler , by education a cardmaker , by transmutation a bearherd , and now by present profession a tinker ?
Oh , this is it that makes your servants droop !
O noble lord , bethink thee of thy birth , Call home thy ancient thoughts from banishment , And banish hence these abject lowly dreams .
Look how thy servants do attend on thee , Each in his office ready at thy beck .
Wilt thou have music ?
Hark !
Apollo plays , And twenty caged nightingales do sing : Or wilt thou sleep ?
We'll have thee to a couch Softer and sweeter than the lustful bed On purpose trimmed up for Semiramis .
Or wilt thou hunt ?
Nay , I have ta'en you napping , gentle love , And have forsworn you with Hortensio .
Tranio , you jest .
But have you both forsworn me ?
Mistress , we have .
Then we are rid of Litio .
I ' faith , he'll have a lusty widow now That shall be wooed and wedded in a day .
God give him joy !
Ay , and he'll tame her .
He says so , Tranio ?
The taming school ?
What , is there such a place ?
Ay , mistress , and Petruchio is the master , That teacheth tricks eleven and twenty long To tame a shrew and charm her chattering tongue .
What is he , Biondello ?
And what of him , Tranio ?
Take in your love , and then let me alone .
God save you , sir .
You are welcome .
Of Mantua .
My life , sir !
how , I pray ?
For that goes hard .
Tis death for anyone in Mantua To come to Padua .
Know you not the cause ?
Tis marvel , but that you are but newly come , You might have heard it else proclaimed about .
Alas , sir , it is worse for me than so , For I have bills for money by exchange From Florence , and must here deliver them .
Ay , sir , in Pisa have I often been , Pisa renowned for grave citizens .
O sir , I do , and will repute you ever The patron of my life and liberty .
In all these circumstances I'll instruct you .
No , no , forsooth , I dare not for my life .
The more my wrong , the more his spite appears .
What , did he marry me to famish me ?
If not , elsewhere they meet with charity .
But I , who never knew how to entreat , Nor never needed that I should entreat , Am starved for meat , giddy for lack of sleep , With oaths kept waking and with brawling fed .
And that which spites me more than all these wants , He does it under name of perfect love , As who should say , if I should sleep or eat , 'Twere deadly sickness or else present death .
What say you to a neat's foot ?
Tis passing good .
I prithee let me have it .
I fear it is too choleric a meat .
Good Grumio , fetch it me .
I can not tell .
I fear 'tis choleric .
What say you to a piece of beef and mustard ?
Ay , but the mustard is too hot a little .
Why then , the beef , and let the mustard rest .
Nay then , I will not .
You shall have the mustard Or else you get no beef of Grumio .
Then both , or one , or anything thou wilt .
Why then , the mustard without the beef .
Go , get thee gone , I say .
Mistress , what cheer ?
Pluck up thy spirits .
Here love , thou seest how diligent I am , To dress thy meat myself and bring it thee .
I am sure , sweet Kate , this kindness merits thanks .
What , not a word ?
Nay , then thou lov'st it not And all my pains is sorted to no proof .
Here , take away this dish .
I pray you , let it stand .
I thank you , sir .
Come , mistress Kate , I'll bear you company .
Come , tailor , let us see these ornaments .
Lay forth the gown .
What news with you , sir ?
Here is the cap your Worship did bespeak .
Why , this was molded on a porringer !
A velvet dish !
Fie , fie , 'tis lewd and filthy !
Why , 'tis a cockle or a walnut shell , A knack , a toy , a trick , a baby's cap .
Away with it !
Come , let me have a bigger .
I'll have no bigger .
When you are gentle , you shall have one too , And not till then .
Why , sir , I trust I may have leave to speak , And speak I will .
I am no child , no babe .
Your betters have endured me say my mind , And if you can not , best you stop your ears .
Why , thou say'st true .
It is a paltry cap , A custard-coffin , a bauble , a silken pie .
I love thee well in that thou lik'st it not .
Love me or love me not , I like the cap , And it I will have , or I will have none .
Thy gown ?
Why , ay .
Come , tailor , let us see 't .
O mercy , God !
What's this ?
A sleeve ?
Tis like a demi-cannon .
What , up and down , carved like an apple tart ?
Here's snip and nip and cut and slish and slash , Like to a censer in a barber's shop .
Why , what i ' devil's name , tailor , call'st thou this ?
You bid me make it orderly and well , According to the fashion and the time .
Marry , and did .
But if you be remembered , I did not bid you mar it to the time .
I'll none of it .
Hence , make your best of it .
I never saw a better-fashioned gown , More quaint , more pleasing , nor more commendable .
Why , true , he means to make a puppet of thee .
Thou liest , thou thread , thou thimble , Thou yard , three-quarters , half-yard , quarter , nail !
Thou flea , thou nit , thou winter cricket thou !
Braved in mine own house with a skein of thread ?
I tell thee , I , that thou hast marred her gown .
Your Worship is deceived .
The gown is made Just as my master had direction .
Grumio gave order how it should be done .
I gave him no order .
I gave him the stuff .
But how did you desire it should be made ?
Marry , sir , with needle and thread .
But did you not request to have it cut ?
Face not me .
Thou hast braved many men ; brave not me .
I will neither be faced nor braved .
I say unto thee , I bid thy master cutout the gown , but I did not bid him cut it to pieces .
Why , here is the note of the fashion to testify .
Read it .
The note lies in 's throat , if he say I said so .
Dost thou love pictures ?
Thou hast a lady far more beautiful Than any woman in this waning age .
And till the tears that she hath shed for thee Like envious floods o'errun her lovely face , She was the fairest creature in the world , And yet she is inferior to none .
I confess the cape .
I confess two sleeves .
Ay , there's the villany .
Error i ' the bill , sir , error i ' the bill !
I commanded the sleeves should be cut out and sewed up again , and that I'll prove upon thee , though thy little finger be armed in a thimble .
I am for thee straight .
Take thou the bill , give me thy mete- yard , and spare not me .
God-a-mercy , Grumio !
Then he shall have no odds .
Well , sir , in brief , the gown is not for me .
You are i ' the right , sir , 'tis for my mistress .
Go , take it up unto thy master's use .
Villain , not for thy life !
Take up my mistress ' gown for thy master's use !
Why , sir , what's your conceit in that ?
O , sir , the conceit is deeper than you think for .
Take up my mistress ' gown to his master's use !
O , fie , fie , fie !
Well , come , my Kate .
What , is the jay more precious than the lark Because his feathers are more beautiful ?
Or is the adder better than the eel Because his painted skin contents the eye ?
Oh , no , good Kate .
If thou account'st it shame , lay it on me , And therefore frolic !
We will hence forthwith To feast and sport us at thy father's house .
I dare assure you , sir , 'tis almost two , And 'twill be supper time ere you come there .
It shall be seven ere I go to horse .
Look what I speak , or do , or think to do , You are still crossing it .
Sirs , let 't alone .
I will not go today , and ere I do It shall be what o'clock I say it is .
Ay , what else ?
and but I be deceived , Signior Baptista may remember me , Near twenty years ago , in Genoa , Where we were lodgers at the Pegasus .
I warrant you .
But , sir , here comes your boy .
Tut , fear not me .
I told him that your father was at Venice , And that you looked for him this day in Padua .
Here comes Baptista .
Set your countenance , sir .
Signior Baptista , you are happily met. , Sir , this is the gentleman I told you of .
I pray you stand good father to me now .
Give me Bianca for my patrimony .
Sir , pardon me in what I have to say .
Your plainness and your shortness please me well .
Right true it is your son Lucentio here Doth love my daughter and she loveth him , Or both dissemble deeply their affections .
Your son shall have my daughter with consent .
Not in my house , Lucentio , for you know Pitchers have ears , and I have many servants .
Besides , old Gremio is heark'ning still , And happily we might be interrupted .
I pray the gods she may , with all my heart !
Cambio .
What sayest thou , Biondello ?
You saw my master wink and laugh upon you ?
Biondello , what of that ?
I pray thee , moralize them .
Then thus : Baptista is safe , talking with the deceiving father of a deceitful son .
And what of him ?
His daughter is to be brought by you to the supper .
And then ?
The old priest at Saint Luke's Church is at your command at all hours .
And what of all this ?
I can not tell , except they are busied about a counterfeit assurance .
Take you assurance of her cum privilegio ad imprimendum solum .
To th ' church take the priest , clerk , and some sufficient honest witnesses .
If this be not that you look for , I have no more to say , But bid Bianca farewell forever and a day .
I knew a wench married in an afternoon as she went to the garden for parsley to stuff a rabbit , and so may you , sir .
And so adieu , sir .
My master hath appointed me to go to Saint Luke's to bid the priest be ready to come against you come with your appendix .
She will be pleased .
Then wherefore should I doubt ?
It shall go hard if "Cambio" go without her .
Come on , i ' God's name , once more toward our father's .
Good Lord , how bright and goodly shines the moon !
The moon ?
The sun !
It is not moonlight now .
I say it is the moon that shines so bright .
I know it is the sun that shines so bright .
Now , by my mother's son , and that's myself , It shall be moon , or star , or what I list , Or e'er I journey to your father's house .
I say it is the moon .
I know it is the moon .
Nay , then you lie .
It is the blessed sun .
Then God be blessed , it is the blessed sun .
Petruchio , go thy ways ; the field is won .
Well , forward , forward !
Thus the bowl should run , And not unluckily against the bias .
But , soft !
Company is coming here .
Young budding virgin , fair and fresh and sweet , Whither away , or where is thy abode ?
Happy the parents of so fair a child .
Will 't please your Mightiness to wash your hands ?
O , how we joy to see your wit restored !
O , that once more you knew but what you are !
These fifteen years you have been in a dream Or , when you waked , so waked as if you slept .
These fifteen years !
By my fay , a goodly nap .
But did I never speak of all that time ?
O , yes , my lord , but very idle words .
Why , sir , you know no house nor no such maid , Nor no such men as you have reckoned up , As Stephen Sly and old John Naps of Greece , And Peter Turph and Henry Pimpernell , And twenty more such names and men as these , Which never were , nor no man ever saw .
Why , how now , Kate !
I hope thou art not mad .
This is a man , old , wrinkled , faded , withered , And not a maiden , as thou say'st he is .
Fair sir , and you , my merry mistress , That with your strange encounter much amazed me , My name is called Vincentio , my dwelling Pisa , And bound I am to Padua , there to visit A son of mine which long I have not seen .
What is his name ?
Lucentio , gentle sir .
Happily met , the happier for thy son .
The sister to my wife , this gentlewoman , Thy son by this hath married .
Wonder not Nor be grieved .
Let me embrace with old Vincentio , And wander we to see thy honest son , Who will of thy arrival be full joyous .
I do assure thee , father , so it is .
Well , Petruchio , this has put me in heart .
Softly and swiftly , sir , for the priest is ready .
I fly , Biondello .
Nay , faith , I'll see the church a ' your back , and then come back to my master's as soon as I can .
I marvel Cambio comes not all this while .
Sir , here's the door .
This is Lucentio's house .
My father's bears more toward the marketplace .
Thither must I , and here I leave you , sir .
You shall not choose but drink before you go .
They're busy within .
You were best knock louder .
Is Signior Lucentio within , sir ?
What if a man bring him a hundred pound or two to make merry withal ?
Hope I may choose , sir .
Come hither , you rogue !
What , have you forgot me ?
Forgot you !
No , sir .
I could not forget you , for I never saw you before in all my life .
What , my old worshipful old master ?
Yes , marry , sir .
See where he looks out of the window .
Is 't so , indeed .
Help , help , help !
Here's a madman will murder me .
Oh , I am undone , I am undone !
What , is the man lunatic ?
Thy father !
O villain !
He is a sailmaker in Bergamo .
You mistake , sir , you mistake , sir .
Pray , what do you think is his name ?
His name !
Lucentio !
Oh , he hath murdered his master !
O my son , my son !
Tell me , thou villain , where is my son Lucentio ?
Carry this mad knave to the jail. , Father Baptista , I charge you see that he be forthcoming .
Carry me to the jail ?
He shall not go to prison .
Talk not , Signior Gremio .
I say he shall go to prison .
Take heed , Signior Baptista , lest you be cony-catched in this business .
I dare swear this is the right Vincentio .
Nay , I dare not swear it .
Yes , I know thee to be Signior Lucentio .
Away with the dotard !
To the jail with him !
O !
We are spoiled and yonder he is !
Pardon , sweet father .
Lives my sweet son ?
Pardon , dear father .
How hast thou offended ?
Where is Lucentio ?
Here's Lucentio , right son to the right Vincentio , That have by marriage made thy daughter mine While counterfeit supposes bleared thine eyne .
Here's packing , with a witness , to deceive us all !
Where is that damned villain , Tranio , That faced and braved me in this matter so ?
Why , tell me , is not this my Cambio ?
Cambio is changed into Lucentio .
Love wrought these miracles .
Bianca's love Made me exchange my state with Tranio , While he did bear my countenance in the town , And happily I have arrived at the last Unto the wished haven of my bliss .
What Tranio did , myself enforced him to .
Then pardon him , sweet father , for my sake .
I'll slit the villain's nose that would have sent me to the jail .
But do you hear , sir , have you married my daughter without asking my goodwill ?
Fear not , Baptista , we will content you .
Go to .
My cake is dough , but I'll in among the rest , Out of hope of all but my share of the feast .
Husband , let's follow to see the end of this ado .
First kiss me , Kate , and we will .
What , in the midst of the street ?
What , art thou ashamed of me ?
No , sir , God forbid , but ashamed to kiss .
Why , then let's home again .
Nay , I will give thee a kiss .
Is not this well ?
Come , my sweet Kate .
Better once than never , for never too late .
Now Lord be thanked for my good amends !
Amen .
I thank thee .
Thou shalt not lose by it .
How fares my noble lord ?
Marry , I fare well , For here is cheer enough .
Where is my wife ?
Here , noble lord .
What is thy will with her ?
Are you my wife and will not call me "husband" ?
My men should call me "lord." I am your goodman .
My fair Bianca , bid my father welcome , While I with selfsame kindness welcome thine .
My banquet is to close our stomachs up , After our great good cheer .
Pray you , sit down , For now we sit to chat as well as eat .
Nothing but sit and sit , and eat and eat !
For both our sakes , I would that word were true .
Now , for my life , Hortensio fears his widow .
You are very sensible , and yet you miss my sense : I mean , Hortensio is afeard of you .
He that is giddy thinks the world turns round .
Roundly replied .
Mistress , how mean you that ?
Thus I conceive by him .
Very well mended .
Kiss him for that , good widow .
He that is giddy thinks the world turns round" , I pray you , tell me what you meant by that .
Your husband being troubled with a shrew Measures my husband's sorrow by his woe .
And now you know my meaning .
A very mean meaning .
Right , I mean you .
To her , widow !
A hundred marks , my Kate does put her down .
That's my office .
Spoke like an officer !
Ha ' to thee , lad !
How likes Gremio these quick-witted folks ?
Believe me , sir , they butt together well .
Ay , but not frighted me .
Therefore I'll sleep again .
Nay , that you shall not .
Am I your bird ?
She hath prevented me .
Here , Signior Tranio , This bird you aimed at , though you hit her not. , Therefore a health to all that shot and missed .
A good swift simile , but something currish .
Tis well , sir , that you hunted for yourself .
Tranio hits you now .
I thank thee for that gird , good Tranio .
He has a little galled me , I confess .
And , as the jest did glance away from me , 'T is ten to one it maimed you two outright .
Now , in good sadness , son Petruchio , I think thou hast the veriest shrew of all .
Well , I say no .
Content .
What's the wager ?
Twenty crowns .
Twenty crowns ?
I'll venture so much of my hawk or hound , But twenty times so much upon my wife .
A hundred then .
Content .
A match !
Tis done .
Who shall begin ?
That will I .
Go , Biondello , bid your mistress come to me .
I go .
Son , I'll be your half Bianca comes .
I'll have no halves .
How !
She's busy , and she can not come ! " Is that an answer ?
Ay , and a kind one too .
Pray God , sir , your wife send you not a worse .
I hope better .
Now , where's my wife ?
She says you have some goodly jest in hand .
She will not come .
She bids you come to her .
Worse and worse .
I know her answer .
What ?
She will not .
Now , by my holidam , here comes Katherina !
What is your will , sir , that you send for me ?
Where is your sister , and Hortensio's wife ?
They sit conferring by the parlor fire .
Go fetch them hither .
If they deny to come , Swinge me them soundly forth unto their husbands .
Here is a wonder , if you talk of a wonder .
And so it is .
I wonder what it bodes .
Marry , peace it bodes , and love , and quiet life , And awful rule , and right supremacy , And , to be short , what not that's sweet and happy ?
Now , fair befall thee , good Petruchio !
The wager thou hast won , and I will add Unto their losses twenty thousand crowns , Another dowry to another daughter , For she is changed as she had never been .
See where she comes and brings your froward wives As prisoners to her womanly persuasion. , Katherine , that cap of yours becomes you not .
Off with that bauble , throw it underfoot .
Lord , let me never have a cause to sigh , Till I be brought to such a silly pass !
Fie !
What a foolish duty call you this ?
I would your duty were as foolish too .
The wisdom of your duty , fair Bianca , Hath cost me an hundred crowns since suppertime .
The more fool you for laying on my duty .
We will have no telling .
She shall not .
I say she shall. , And first begin with her .
Fie , fie !
Unknit that threat'ning unkind brow And dart not scornful glances from those eyes To wound thy lord , thy king , thy governor .
Such duty as the subject owes the prince , Even such a woman oweth to her husband .
And when she is froward , peevish , sullen , sour , And not obedient to his honest will , What is she but a foul contending rebel And graceless traitor to her loving lord ?
I am ashamed that women are so simple To offer war where they should kneel for peace ; Or seek for rule , supremacy and sway When they are bound to serve , love , and obey .
Why are our bodies soft and weak and smooth , Unapt to toil and trouble in the world , But that our soft conditions and our hearts Should well agree with our external parts ?
Come , come , you froward and unable worms !
My mind hath been as big as one of yours , My heart as great , my reason haply more , To bandy word for word and frown for frown .
But now I see our lances are but straws , Our strength as weak , our weakness past compare , That seeming to be most which we indeed least are .
Come on and kiss me , Kate .
Tis a good hearing when children are toward .
But a harsh hearing when women are froward .
Come , Kate , we'll to bed .
We three are married , but you two are sped .
Tis a wonder , by your leave , she will be tamed so .
Madam wife , they say that I have dreamed And slept above some fifteen year or more .
Ay , and the time seems thirty unto me , Being all this time abandoned from your bed .
Tis much. , Servants , leave me and her alone .
Madam , undress you and come now to bed .
Thrice noble lord , let me entreat of you To pardon me yet for a night or two , Or if not so , until the sun be set .
For your physicians have expressly charged , In peril to incur your former malady , That I should yet absent me from your bed .
I hope this reason stands for my excuse .
Ay , it stands so that I may hardly tarry so long .
But I would be loath to fall into my dreams again .
Your Honor's players , hearing your amendment , Are come to play a pleasant comedy , For so your doctors hold it very meet , Seeing too much sadness hath congealed your blood , And melancholy is the nurse of frenzy .
Therefore they thought it good you hear a play And frame your mind to mirth and merriment , Which bars a thousand harms and lengthens life .
Let them play it .
What , household stuff ?
It is a kind of history .
Well , we'll see 't .
We shall ne'er be younger .
Pisa , renowned for grave citizens , Gave me my being and my father first , A merchant of great traffic through the world , Vincentio , come of the Bentivolii .
I'll pheeze you , in faith .
A pair of stocks , you rogue !
Y'are a baggage , the Slys are no rogues .
Therefore You will not pay for the glasses you have burst ?
No , not a denier .
Go by , Saint Jeronimy .
Go to thy cold bed and warm thee .
I know my remedy .
I'll not budge an inch , boy .
Let him come , and kindly .
Gramercies , Tranio , well dost thou advise .
But stay awhile .
What company is this ?
Master , some show to welcome us to town .
I ' faith , sir , you shall never need to fear .
But if it were , doubt not her care should be To comb your noddle with a three-legged stool And paint your face and use you like a fool .
From all such devils , good Lord , deliver us !
And me too , good Lord !
Maid's mild behavior and sobriety .
Sister , content you in my discontent. , Sir , to your pleasure humbly I subscribe .
My books and instruments shall be my company , On them to look and practice by myself .
Hark , Tranio !
Signior Baptista , will you be so strange ?
Why will you mew her up , Signior Baptista , for this fiend of hell And make her bear the penance of her tongue ?
And for I know she taketh most delight In music , instruments , and poetry , Schoolmasters will I keep within my house , Fit to instruct her youth .
And so farewell. , Katherina , you may stay , For I have more to commune with Bianca .
Why , and I trust I may go too , may I not ?
What , shall I be appointed hours as though , belike , I knew not what to take and what to leave , ha ?
You may go to the devil's dam !
Farewell .
Though the nature of our quarrel yet never brooked parle , know now upon advice , it toucheth us both , that we may yet again have access to our fair mistress and be happy rivals in Bianca's love , to labor and effect one thing specially .
What's that , I pray ?
Marry , sir , to get a husband for her sister .
A husband ?
A devil !
I say a husband .
I say a devil .
Think'st thou , Hortensio , though her father be very rich , any man is so very a fool to be married to hell ?
Tush , Gremio .
Though it pass your patience and mine to endure her loud alarums , why , man , there be good fellows in the world , an a man could light on them , would take her with all faults , and money enough .
I can not tell .
How say you , Signior Gremio ?
I am agreed , and would I had given him the best horse inv Padua to begin his wooing that would thoroughly woo her , wed her , and bed her , and rid the house of her !
Come on .
I pray , sir , tell me , is it possible That love should of a sudden take such hold ?
O Tranio , till I found it to be true , I never thought it possible or likely .
Affection is not rated from the heart .
If love have touched you , naught remains but so : Gramercies , lad , go forward .
This contents .
The rest will comfort , for thy counsel's sound .
Master , you looked so longly on the maid , Perhaps you marked not what's the pith of all .
Oh yes , I saw sweet beauty in her face Such as the daughter of Agenor had , That made great Jove to humble him to her hand When with his knees he kissed the Cretan strand .
Saw you no more ?
Tranio , I saw her coral lips to move And with her breath she did perfume the air .
Ah , Tranio , what a cruel father's he !
But art thou not advised , he took some care To get her cunning schoolmasters to instruct her ?
Ay , marry , am I , sir ; and now 'tis plotted !
I have it , Tranio !
Master , for my hand , Both our inventions meet and jump in one .
Tell me thine first .
You will be schoolmaster And undertake the teaching of the maid : That's your device .
It is .
May it be done ?
Not possible .
Tis hatched , and shall be so .
When Biondello comes , he waits on thee , But I will charm him first to keep his tongue .
Where have I been ?
Nay , how now , where are you ?
Sirrah , come hither : 'tis no time to jest , And therefore frame your manners to the time .
You understand me ?
Aye , sir .
And not a jot of "Tranio" in your mouth .
Would I were so too .
So could I , faith , boy , to have the next wish after , That Lucentio indeed had Baptista's youngest daughter .
But , sirrah , not for my sake , but your master's , I advise You use your manners discreetly in all kind of companies .
When I am alone , why then I am Tranio ; But in all places else , your master Lucentio .
Tranio , let's go .
One thing more rests , that thyself execute , to make one among these wooers .
If thou ask me why , sufficeth my reasons are both good and weighty .
My lord , you nod .
You do not mind the play .
A good matter , surely .
Comes there any more of it ?
Tis a very excellent piece of work , madam lady .
Would 'twere done .
Huntsman , I charge thee , tender well my hounds .
Breathe Merriman , the poor cur is embossed , And couple Clowder with the deep-mouthed brach .
Why , Belman is as good as he , my lord .
Trust me , I take him for the better dog .
Thou art a fool .
If Echo were as fleet , I would esteem him worth a dozen such .
But sup them well and look unto them all .
Tomorrow I intend to hunt again .
I will , my lord .
What's here ?
One dead , or drunk ?
See , doth he breathe ?
He breathes , my lord .
Were he not warmed with ale , This were a bed but cold to sleep so soundly .
Grim death , how foul and loathsome is thine image !
Sirs , I will practice on this drunken man .
Verona , for a while I take my leave , To see my friends in Padua , but of all My best beloved and approved friend , Hortensio .
And I trow this is his house .
Here , sirrah Grumio .
Knock , I say .
Knock , sir ?
Whom should I knock ?
Is there any man has rebused your Worship ?
Knock you here , sir ?
Villain , I say , knock me at this gate And rap me well , or I'll knock your knave's pate .
My master is grown quarrelsome .
How now , what's the matter ?
My old friend Grumio and my good friend Petruchio ?
How do you all at Verona ?
Signior Hortensio , come you to part the fray ?
Nay , 'tis no matter , sir , what he 'leges in Latin .
I bade the rascal knock upon your gate And could not get him for my heart to do it .
Knock at the gate ?
O heavens !
Spake you not these words plain : "Sirrah , knock me here , rap me here , knock me well , and knock me soundly" ?
And come you now with "knocking at the gate" ?
Petruchio , patience .
I am Grumio's pledge .
Why , this ' a heavy chance 'twixt him and you , Your ancient , trusty , pleasant servant Grumio .
And tell me now , sweet friend , what happy gale Blows you to Padua here from old Verona ?
Such wind as scatters young men through the world To seek their fortunes farther than at home , Where small experience grows .
Crowns in my purse I have and goods at home , And so am come abroad to see the world .
Thou'dst thank me but a little for my counsel ; And yet I'll promise thee she shall be rich , And very rich .
But thou'rt too much my friend , And I'll not wish thee to her .
Signior Hortensio , 'twixt such friends as we Few words suffice .
I can , Petruchio , help thee to a wife With wealth enough , and young and beauteous , Brought up as best becomes a gentlewoman .
Her only fault , and that is faults enough , Is that she is intolerable curst , And shrewd and froward , so beyond all measure That , were my state far worser than it is , I would not wed her for a mine of gold .
Hortensio , peace .
Thou know'st not gold's effect .
Her father is Baptista Minola , An affable and courteous gentleman .
Her name is Katherina Minola , Renowned in Padua for her scolding tongue .
I know her father , though I know not her , And he knew my deceased father well .
I will not sleep , Hortensio , till I see her , And therefore let me be thus bold with you To give you over at this first encounter , Unless you will accompany me thither .
Tarry , Petruchio , I must go with thee , For in Baptista's keep my treasure is .
He hath the jewel of my life in hold , His youngest daughter , beautiful Bianca , And her withholds from me and other more , Suitors to her and rivals in my love , Supposing it a thing impossible , For those defects I have before rehearsed , That ever Katherina will be wooed .
Katherine the curst ! " A title for a maid of all titles the worst .
Now shall my friend Petruchio do me grace , And offer me disguised in sober robes To old Baptista as a schoolmaster Well seen in music , to instruct Bianca , That so I may , by this device at least , Have leave and leisure to make love to her And , unsuspected , court her by herself .
Here's no knavery !
Master , master , look about you .
Who goes there , ha ?
Peace , Grumio .
It is the rival of my love .
Petruchio , stand by a while .
O this learning , what a thing it is !
And you are well met , Signior Hortensio .
Trow you whither I am going ?
To Baptista Minola .
Tis well .
And I have met a gentleman Hath promised me to help me to another , A fine musician to instruct our mistress .
Gremio , 'tis now no time to vent our love .
So said , so done , is well .
Hortensio , have you told him all her faults ?
I know she is an irksome brawling scold .
If that be all , masters , I hear no harm .
No ?
Say'st me so , friend ?
What countryman ?
My father dead , my fortune lives for me .
And I do hope good days and long to see .
O sir , such a life with such a wife were strange !
But if you have a stomach , to 't , i ' God's name : You shall have me assisting you in all .
But will you woo this wildcat ?
Why came I hither but to that intent ?
Have I not heard the sea , puffed up with winds , Rage like an angry boar chafed with sweat ?
Have I not heard great ordnance in the field , And heaven's artillery thunder in the skies ?
Hortensio , hark .
And so we will , provided that he win her .
I would I were as sure of a good dinner .
He that has the two fair daughters , is 't he you mean ?
Not her that chides , sir , at any hand , I pray .
Sir , a word ere you go .
Are you a suitor to the maid you talk of , yea or no ?
An if I be , sir , is it any offense ?
No , if without more words you will get you hence .
For this reason , if you'll know : That she's the choice love of Signior Gremio .
That she's the chosen of Signior Hortensio .
Softly , my masters .
If you be gentlemen , Do me this right : hear me with patience .
Baptista is a noble gentleman , To whom my father is not all unknown , And were his daughter fairer than she is , She may more suitors have , and me for one .
Believe me , lord , I think he can not choose .
It would seem strange unto him when he waked .
Even as a flatt'ring dream or worthless fancy .
Then take him up and manage well the jest .
Carry him gently to my fairest chamber And hang it round with all my wanton pictures .
Balm his foul head in warm distilled waters And burn sweet wood to make the lodging sweet .
My lord , I warrant you we will play our part As he shall think by our true diligence He is no less than what we say he is .
Fair Leda's daughter had a thousand wooers ; Then well one more may fair Bianca have .
This gentleman will out-talk us all .
Hortensio , to what end are all these words ?
Yea , leave that labor to great Hercules , And let it be more than Alcides ' twelve .
Sir , you say well , and well you do conceive .
O excellent motion !
Fellows , let's be gone .
The motion's good indeed and be it so. , Petruchio , I shall be your
Good sister , wrong me not nor wrong yourself , To make a bondmaid and a slave of me .
That I disdain .
See thou dissemble not .
Minion , thou liest .
Is 't not Hortensio ?
Oh , then belike you fancy riches more .
You will have Gremio to keep you fair .
Is it for him you do envy me so ?
What , in my sight ? , Bianca , get thee in .
What , will you not suffer me ?
Talk not to me .
But who comes here ?
Good morrow , neighbor Baptista .
Good morrow , neighbor Gremio. , God save you , gentlemen !
And you , good sir .
Pray , have you not a daughter Called Katherina , fair and virtuous ?
I have a daughter , sir , called Katherina .
You wrong me , Signior Gremio .
Give me leave. , I am a gentleman of Verona , sir , That hearing of her beauty and her wit , Her affability and bashful modesty , Her wondrous qualities and mild behavior , Am bold to show myself a forward guest Within your house , to make mine eye the witness Of that report which I so oft have heard .
You're welcome , sir , and he for your good sake .
But for my daughter Katherine , this I know , She is not for your turn , the more my grief .
I see you do not mean to part with her , Or else you like not of my company .
Mistake me not .
I speak but as I find .
Whence are you , sir ?
What may I call your name ?
Petruchio is my name , Antonio's son , A man well known throughout all Italy .
I know him well .
You are welcome for his sake .
Oh , pardon me , Signior Gremio , I would fain be doing .
I doubt it not , sir , but you will curse your wooing. , Neighbor , this is a gift very grateful , I am sure of it .
To express the like kindness , myself , that have been more kindly beholding to you than any , freely give unto you this young scholar
A thousand thanks , Signior Gremio .
Welcome , good Cambio .
Lucentio is your name .
Of whence , I pray ?
A mighty man of Pisa .
By report I know him well .
You are very welcome , sir .
We will go walk a little in the orchard , And then to dinner .
You are passing welcome , And so I pray you all to think yourselves .
Signior Baptista , my business asketh haste , And every day I can not come to woo .
You knew my father well , and in him me , Left solely heir to all his lands and goods , Which I have bettered rather than decreased .
Then tell me , if I get your daughter's love , What dowry shall I have with her to wife ?
After my death , the one half of my lands , And , in possession , twenty thousand crowns .
Let specialties be therefore drawn between us , That covenants may be kept on either hand .
Ay , when the special thing is well obtained , That is , her love , for that is all in all .
Why , that is nothing .
For I tell you , father , I am as peremptory as she proud-minded ; And where two raging fires meet together , They do consume the thing that feeds their fury .
So I to her and so she yields to me , For I am rough and woo not like a babe .
Well mayst thou woo , and happy be thy speed .
But be thou armed for some unhappy words .
Ay , to the proof , as mountains are for winds , That shakes not , though they blow perpetually .
How now , my friend , why dost thou look so pale ?
What , will my daughter prove a good musician ?
I think she'll sooner prove a soldier .
Why , then thou canst not break her to the lute ?
I'll fume with them ! " And with that word she struck me on the head , And through the instrument my pate made way ,
Now , by the world , it is a lusty wench .
I love her ten times more than e'er I did .
Oh , how I long to have some chat with her !
I pray you do .
I'll attend her here And woo her with some spirit when she comes .
Say that she rail ; why then I'll tell her plain She sings as sweetly as a nightingale .
Say that she frown ; I'll say she looks as clear As morning roses newly washed with dew .
Say she be mute and will not speak a word ; Then I'll commend her volubility , And say she uttereth piercing eloquence .
If she do bid me pack , I'll give her thanks , As though she bid me stay by her a week .
If she deny to wed , I'll crave the day When I shall ask the banns and when be married .
Take him up gently , and to bed with him , And each one to his office when he wakes .
Sirrah , go see what trumpet 'tis that sounds .
Belike some noble gentleman that means , Traveling some journey , to repose him here .
An't please your Honor , players That offer service to your Lordship .
Bid them come near .
Now , fellows , you are welcome .
We thank your Honor .
Do you intend to stay with me tonight ?
So please your Lordship to accept our duty .
With all my heart .
This fellow I remember Since once he played a farmer's eldest son .
Twas where you wooed the gentlewoman so well .
I have forgot your name , but sure that part Was aptly fitted and naturally performed .
Good morrow , Kate , for that's your name , I hear .
Well have you heard , but something hard of hearing .
Moved , " in good time .
I knew you at the first You were a moveable .
Why , what's a moveable ?
A joint stool .
Thou hast hit it .
Come , sit on me .
Asses are made to bear , and so are you .
Women are made to bear , and so are you .
No such jade as you , if me you mean .
Alas , good Kate , I will not burden thee , For knowing thee to be but young and light , Too light for such a swain as you to catch , And yet as heavy as my weight should be .
Should be" , should buzz !
If I be waspish , best beware my sting .
My remedy is then to pluck it out .
Ay , if the fool could find it where it lies .
Who knows not where a wasp does wear his sting ?
In his tail .
In his tongue .
Whose tongue ?
Yours , if you talk of tales .
What , with my tongue in your tail ?
Nay , come again , Good Kate .
That I'll try .
I swear I'll cuff you if you strike again .
So may you lose your arms .
No cock of mine .
Nay , come , Kate , come .
You must not look so sour .
It is my fashion , when I see a crab .
Why , here's no crab , and therefore look not sour .
There is , there is .
Then show it me .
Had I a glass , I would .
What , you mean my face ?
Well aimed of such a young one .
Now , by Saint George , I am too young for you .
Yet you are withered .
Tis with cares .
I care not .
Let me go .
No , not a whit .
I find you passing gentle .
Twas told me you were rough and coy and sullen , And now I find report a very liar .
Thou canst not frown , thou canst not look askance , Nor bite the lip as angry wenches will , Nor hast thou pleasure to be cross in talk .
But thou with mildness entertain'st thy wooers , With gentle conference , soft and affable .
Why does the world report that Kate doth limp ?
O slanderous world !
Kate like the hazel-twig Is straight and slender and as brown in hue As hazel nuts , and sweeter than the kernels .
Oh , let me see thee walk !
Did ever Dian so become a grove As Kate this chamber with her princely gait ?
A witty mother !
Witless else her son .
Am I not wise ?
For I am he am born to tame you , Kate , And bring you from a wild Kate to a Kate Conformable as other household Kates .
I should know that voice .
It should be , But he is drowned , and these are devils .
Oh , defend me !
Four legs and two voices , a most delicate monster .
His forward voice now is to speak well of his friend .
His backward voice is to utter foul speeches and to detract .
If all the wine in my bottle will recover him , I will help his ague .
Come .
Stephano !
Doth thy other mouth call me ?
Mercy , mercy !
This is a devil , and no monster .
I will leave him .
I have no long spoon .
Stephano !
If thou beest Stephano , touch me and speak to me .
For I am Trinculo , be not afeard , thy good friend Trinculo .
If thou beest Trinculo , come forth .
I'll pull thee by the lesser legs .
If any be Trinculo's legs , these are they .
But art thou not drowned , Stephano ?
I hope now thou art not drowned .
Is the storm overblown ?
I hid me under the dead mooncalf's gaberdine for fear of the storm .
And art thou living , Stephano ?
O Stephano , two Neapolitans 'scaped !
Prithee , do not turn me about .
My stomach is not constant .
Swum ashore , man , like a duck .
I can swim like a duck , I'll be sworn .
Here , kiss the book .
O Stephano , hast any more of this ?
The whole butt , man .
Hast thou not dropped from heaven ?
Out o ' th ' moon , I do assure thee .
I was the man i ' the moon when time was .
My mistress showed me thee and thy dog and thy bush .
I afeard of him !
A very weak monster .
The man i ' th ' moon !
A most poor credulous monster. , Well drawn , monster , in good sooth !
By this light , a most perfidious and drunken monster .
When 's god's asleep , he'll rob his bottle .
Come on then .
Down , and swear .
I shall laugh myself to death at this puppy-headed monster .
A most scurvy monster .
I could find in my heart to beat him , But that the poor monster's in drink .
An abominable monster !
I'll show thee the best springs .
I'll pluck thee berries .
I'll fish for thee and get thee wood enough .
A plague upon the tyrant that I serve !
A most ridiculous monster , to make a wonder of a poor drunkard .
I prithee now , lead the way without any more talking. , Trinculo , the king and all our company else being drowned , we will inherit here. , Here , bear my bottle. , Fellow Trinculo , we'll fill him by and by again .
A howling monster , a drunken monster .
O brave monster !
Lead the way .
Now would I give a thousand furlongs of sea for an acre of barren ground : long heath , brown furze , anything .
Some kinds of baseness Are nobly undergone .
And most poor matters Point to rich ends .
This my mean task Would be as heavy to me as odious , but The mistress which I serve quickens what's dead And makes my labors pleasures .
Oh , she is Ten times more gentle than her father's crabbed , And he's composed of harshness .
I must remove Some thousands of these logs and pile them up , Upon a sore injunction .
My sweet mistress Weeps when she sees me work , and says such baseness Had never like executor .
I forget , But these sweet thoughts do even refresh my labors , Most busiest when I do it .
Alas now , pray you , Work not so hard .
I would the lightning had Burnt up those logs that you are enjoined to pile !
Pray , set it down and rest you .
When this burns , 'Twill weep for having wearied you .
My father Is hard at study .
Pray now , rest yourself .
He's safe for these three hours .
O most dear mistress , The sun will set before I shall discharge What I must strive to do .
If you'll sit down , I'll bear your logs the while .
Pray , give me that .
I'll carry it to the pile .
It would become me As well as it does you , and I should do it With much more ease , for my good will is to it And yours it is against .
You look wearily .
I do beseech you , Chiefly that I might set it in my prayers , What is your name ?
Miranda. , O my father , I have broke your hest to say so !
Full many a lady I have eyed with best regard and many a time
For several virtues Have I liked several women .
But you , O you , So perfect and so peerless , are created Of every creature's best .
I do not know One of my sex , no woman's face remember , Save , from my glass , mine own .
Nor have I seen More that I may call men than you , good friend , And my dear father .
I am in my condition A prince , Miranda , I do think , a king ; I would , not so ! , and would no more endure This wooden slavery than to suffer The flesh-fly blow my mouth .
Hear my soul speak .
The very instant that I saw you did My heart fly to your service , there resides To make me slave to it , and for your sake Am I this patient log-man .
Do you love me ?
O heaven , O earth , bear witness to this sound And crown what I profess with kind event
If I speak true !
I Beyond all limit of what else i ' th ' world Do love , prize , honor you .
I am a fool To weep at what I am glad of .
Wherefore weep you ?
At mine unworthiness , that dare not offer What I desire to give , and much less take What I shall die to want .
But this is trifling , And all the more it seeks to hide itself The bigger bulk it shows .
I am your wife if you will marry me .
If not , I'll die your maid .
To be your fellow You may deny me , but I'll be your servant Whether you will or no .
My mistress , dearest , and I thus humble ever .
My husband , then ?
A thousand thousand !
I'll to my book , For yet ere supper-time must I perform Much business appertaining .
Tell not me .
When the butt is out , we will drink water .
Not a drop before .
Therefore bear up and board 'em. , Servant- monster , drink to me .
Servant-monster" ?
The folly of this island .
They say there's but five upon this isle .
We are three of them .
If th ' other two be brained like us , the state totters .
Drink , servant-monster , when I bid thee .
Thy eyes are almost set in thy head .
Where should they be set else ?
He were a brave monster indeed , if they were set in his tail .
For my part , the sea can not drown me .
He's no standard .
We'll not run , Monsieur Monster .
Nor go neither .
But you'll lie like dogs , and yet say nothing neither .
Mooncalf , speak once in thy life , if thou beest a good mooncalf .
How does thy honor ?
Let me lick thy shoe .
Lord , " quoth he ?
That a monster should be such a natural !
Trinculo , keep a good tongue in your head .
If you prove a mutineer , the next tree .
I thank my noble lord .
Wilt thou be pleased to hearken once again to the suit I made to thee ?
I will stand , and so shall Trinculo .
Thou liest .
Trinculo , if you trouble him any more in 's tale , by this hand , I will supplant some of your teeth .
Why , I said nothing .
Mum , then , and no more .
Proceed .
I say , by sorcery he got this isle .
From me he got it .
If thy greatness will Revenge it on him , for I know thou darest , But this thing dare not , That's most certain .
Thou shalt be lord of it and I'll serve thee .
How now shall this be compassed ?
Canst thou bring me to th ' party ?
Yea , yea , my lord .
I'll yield him thee asleep , Where thou mayst knock a nail into his head .
Thou liest .
Thou canst not .
What a pied ninny's this ! , Thou scurvy patch ! , I do beseech thy greatness , give him blows And take his bottle from him .
When that's gone , He shall drink naught but brine , for I'll not show him Where the quick freshes are .
Trinculo , run into no further danger .
Interrupt the monster one word further , and , by this hand , I'll turn my mercy out o ' doors and make a stockfish of thee .
Why , what did I ?
I did nothing .
I'll go farther off .
Didst thou not say he lied ?
Thou liest .
I did not give the lie .
Out o ' your wits and hearing too ?
A pox o ' your bottle !
Ha , ha , ha !
Now , forward with your tale. , Prithee , stand farther off .
Beat him enough .
After a little time , I'll beat him too .
Why , as I told thee , 'tis a custom with him , I ' th ' afternoon to sleep .
There thou mayst brain him , Having first seized his books ; or with a log Batter his skull ; or paunch him with a stake ; Or cut his weasand with thy knife .
Remember First to possess his books , for without them He's but a sot , as I am , nor hath not One spirit to command .
They all do hate him As rootedly as I .
Burn but his books .
He has brave utensils , for so he calls them , Which when he has a house , he'll deck withal .
And that most deeply to consider is The beauty of his daughter .
He himself Calls her a nonpareil .
I never saw a woman , But only Sycorax my dam and she .
But she as far surpasseth Sycorax As great'st does least .
Is it so brave a lass ?
Ay , lord .
Monster , I will kill this man .
His daughter and I will be king and queen , save our graces ! , and Trinculo and thyself shall be viceroys. , Dost thou like the plot , Trinculo ?
Excellent .
Give me thy hand .
I am sorry I beat thee .
But while thou livest , keep a good tongue in thy head .
Within this half hour will he be asleep .
Wilt thou destroy him then ?
If by your art , my dearest father , you have Put the wild waters in this roar , allay them .
The sky , it seems , would pour down stinking pitch , But that the sea , mounting to th ' welkin's cheek , Dashes the fire out .
Oh , I have suffered With those that I saw suffer .
A brave vessel Who had , no doubt , some noble creature in her Dashed all to pieces .
Oh , the cry did knock Against my very heart !
Poor souls , they perished .
Had I been any god of power , I would Have sunk the sea within the earth or ere It should the good ship so have swallowed and The fraughting souls within her .
Be collected .
No more amazement .
Tell your piteous heart There's no harm done .
Oh , woe the day !
No harm .
More to know Did never meddle with my thoughts .
Ay , on mine honor .
Thou makest me merry .
I am full of pleasure .
Let us be jocund .
At thy request , monster , I will do reason , any reason. , Come on , Trinculo , let us sing .
That's not the tune .
What is this same ?
O , forgive me my sins !
Art thou afeard ?
No , monster , not I .
Be not afeard .
This will prove a brave kingdom to me , where I shall have my music for nothing .
When Prospero is destroyed .
That shall be by and by .
I remember the story .
The sound is going away .
Let's follow it , and after do our work .
Lead , monster ; we'll follow .
I would I could see this taborer .
He lays it on .
Wilt come ?
My old bones ache .
Here's a maze trod indeed Through forthrights and meanders .
By your patience , I needs must rest me .
Old lord , I can not blame thee , Who am myself attached with weariness To th ' dulling of my spirits .
Sit down and rest .
He is drowned Whom thus we stray to find , and the sea mocks Our frustrate search on land .
Well , let him go .
What harmony is this ?
My good friends , hark !
Marvelous sweet music !
Give us kind keepers , heavens !
What were these ?
Now I will believe That there are unicorns , that in Arabia There is one tree , the phoenix ' throne , one phoenix At this hour reigning there .
Travelers ne'er did lie , Though fools at home condemn 'em .
If in Naples I should report this now , would they believe me ?
If I should say , I saw such islanders , For , certes , these are people of the island , Who , though they are of monstrous shape , yet note , Their manners are more gentle-kind than of Our human generation you shall find Many , nay , almost any .
They vanished strangely .
No matter , since They have left their viands behind , for we have stomachs .
Will 't please you taste of what is here ?
Not I .
Faith , sir , you need not fear .
Brother , my lord the duke , Stand to and do as we .
Oh , it is monstrous , monstrous .
Methought the billows spoke and told me of it , The winds did sing it to me , and the thunder , That deep and dreadful organ pipe , pronounced The name of Prosper .
It did bass my trespass .
Therefore my son i ' th ' ooze is bedded , and I'll seek him deeper than e'er plummet sounded And with him there lie mudded .
But one fiend at a time , I'll fight their legions o'er .
I'll be thy second .
All three of them are desperate .
Their great guilt , Like poison given to work a great time after , Now 'gins to bite the spirits .
I do beseech you That are of suppler joints , follow them swiftly And hinder them from what this ecstasy May now provoke them to .
Follow , I pray you .
But If thou dost break her virgin knot before All sanctimonious ceremonies may With full and holy rite be ministered , No sweet aspersion shall the heavens let fall To make this contract grow , but barren hate , Sour-eyed disdain , and discord shall bestrew The union of your bed with weeds so loathly That you shall hate it both .
Fairly spoke .
Sit then and talk with her .
She is thine own. , What , Ariel !
My industrious servant , Ariel !
What would my potent master ?
Here I am .
Thou and thy meaner fellows your last service Did worthily perform , and I must use you In such another trick .
Go bring the rabble , O'er whom I give thee power , here to this place .
It is my promise , And they expect it from me .
Presently ?
Ay , with a twink .
Before you can say "Come" and "Go , " And breathe twice and cry "So , so ! " Each one , tripping on his toe ,
Tis time I should inform thee farther .
Lend thy hand And pluck my magic garment from me .
Not yet." The hour's now come .
Canst thou remember A time before we came unto this cell ?
I do not think thou canst , for then thou wast not Out three years old .
Certainly , sir , I can .
By what ?
By any other house or person ?
Of anything the image tell me that Hath kept with thy remembrance .
Dearly my delicate Ariel .
Do not approach Till thou dost hear me call .
Well , I conceive .
I warrant you , sir , The white cold virgin snow upon my heart Abates the ardor of my liver .
Well. , Now come , my Ariel !
Bring a corollary , Rather than want a spirit .
Appear and pertly ! , No tongue .
All eyes !
Be silent .
Ceres , most bounteous lady , thy rich leas Of wheat , rye , barley , vetches , oats , and peas ; Thy turfy mountains , where live nibbling sheep , And flat meads thatched with stover , them to keep ; Thy banks with pioned and twilled brims ,
Why hath thy queen Summoned me hither to this short-grassed green ?
A contract of true love to celebrate , And some donation freely to estate On the blessed lovers .
Tell me , heavenly bow , If Venus or her son , as thou dost know , Do now attend the queen ?
Since they did plot The means that dusky Dis my daughter got , Her and her blind boy's scandaled company I have forsworn .
Of her society Be not afraid .
I met her deity Cutting the clouds towards Paphos , and her son Dove-drawn with her .
Here thought they to have done Some wanton charm upon this man and maid , Whose vows are that no bed-right shall be paid Till Hymen's torch be lighted , but in vain .
Mars's hot minion is returned again .
Her waspish-headed son has broke his arrows , Swears he will shoot no more , but play with sparrows And be a boy right out .
Highest queen of state , Great Juno , comes .
I know her by her gait .
How does my bounteous sister ?
Go with me To bless this twain that they may prosperous be , And honored in their issue .
This is a most majestic vision , and Harmonious charmingly .
May I be bold To think these spirits ?
Spirits , which by mine art I have from their confines called to enact My present fancies .
Let me live here ever .
So rare a wondered father and a wife Makes this place paradise .
Sweet now , silence .
Juno and Ceres whisper seriously .
There's something else to do .
Hush and be mute , Or else our spell is marred .
Come , temperate nymphs , and help to celebrate A contract of true love .
Be not too late .
You sunburnt sicklemen of August weary , Come hither from the furrow and be merry .
Your rye-straw hats put on , And these fresh nymphs encounter every one In country footing .
The minute of their plot Is almost come. , Well done .
Never till this day Saw I him touched with anger so distempered .
We are such stuff As dreams are made on , and our little life Is rounded with a sleep .
Sir , I am vexed .
Bear with my weakness .
My old brain is troubled .
Be not disturbed with my infirmity .
If you be pleased , retire into my cell And there repose .
A turn or two I'll walk To still my beating mind .
We wish your peace .
Come with a thought .
I thank thee , Ariel .
Come .
Thy thoughts I cleave to .
What's thy pleasure ?
Spirit , We must prepare to meet with Caliban .
Ay , my commander .
When I presented Ceres , I thought to have told thee of it , but I feared Lest I might anger thee .
Say again , where didst thou leave these varlets ?
I told you , sir , they were red-hot with drinking , So full of valor that they smote the air For breathing in their faces , beat the ground For kissing of their feet , yet always bending Towards their project .
Then I beat my tabor , At which , like unbacked colts , they pricked their ears , Advanced their eyelids , lifted up their noses As they smelt music .
So I charmed their ears That , calflike , they my lowing followed through Toothed briers , sharp furzes , pricking gorse , and thorns , Which entered their frail shins .
At last I left them I ' th ' filthy-mantled pool beyond your cell , There dancing up to th ' chins , that the foul lake O'erstunk their feet .
This was well done , my bird .
Thy shape invisible retain thou still .
The trumpery in my house , go bring it hither For stale to catch these thieves .
I go , I go .
A devil , a born devil on whose nature Nurture can never stick , on whom my pains , Humanely taken , all , all lost , quite lost .
And as with age his body uglier grows , So his mind cankers .
I will plague them all , Even to roaring .
Come , hang them on this line .
Pray you , tread softly , that the blind mole may not hear a foot fall .
We now are near his cell .
Monster , your fairy , which you say is a harmless fairy , has done little better than played the jack with us .
Monster , I do smell all horse piss , at which my nose is in great indignation .
So is mine. , Do you hear , monster ?
If I should take a displeasure against you , look you , Thou wert but a lost monster .
Good my lord , give me thy favor still .
Be patient , for the prize I'll bring thee to Shall hoodwink this mischance .
Therefore speak softly .
All's hushed as midnight yet .
That's more to me than my wetting .
Yet this is your harmless fairy , monster .
Prithee , my king , be quiet .
Seest thou here , This is the mouth o ' th ' cell .
No noise , and enter .
Do that good mischief which may make this island Thine own for ever , and I , thy Caliban , For aye thy foot-licker .
Give me thy hand .
I do begin to have bloody thoughts .
Let it alone , thou fool .
It is but trash .
Oh , ho , monster , we know what belongs to a frippery. , Put off that gown , Trinculo .
By this hand , I'll have that gown .
Thy grace shall have it .
The dropsy drown this fool !
What do you mean To dote thus on such luggage ?
Let's alone , And do the murder first .
If he awake , From toe to crown he'll fill our skins with pinches , Make us strange stuff .
Do , do .
I thank thee for that jest .
Wit shall not go unrewarded while I am king of this country .
There's another garment for 't .
Monster , come , put some lime upon your fingers , and away with the rest .
I will have none on 't .
Monster , lay to your fingers .
Help to bear this away where my hogshead of wine is , or I'll turn you out of my kingdom .
Go to , carry this .
And this .
Ay , and this .
Hey , Mountain , hey !
Silver .
There it goes , Silver !
Tis far off , And rather like a dream than an assurance That my remembrance warrants .
Had I not Four or five women once that tended me ?
Thou hadst , and more , Miranda .
But how is it That this lives in thy mind ?
If thou rememberest aught ere thou camest here , How thou camest here thou mayst .
But that I do not .
Twelve year since , Miranda , twelve year since , Thy father was the Duke of Milan and A prince of power .
Sir , are not you my father ?
Thy mother was a piece of virtue and She said thou wast my daughter .
And thy father Was Duke of Milan , and thou his only heir And princess no worse issued .
Oh , the heavens !
What foul play had we that we came from thence ?
Or blesse was 't we did ?
Both , both , my girl .
By foul play , as thou sayst , were we heaved thence , But blessedly holp hither .
Fury , Fury ! , There , Tyrant , there .
Hark , hark !
Go charge my goblins that they grind their joints With dry convulsions , shorten up their sinews With aged cramps , and more pinch-spotted make them Than pard or cat o ' mountain .
Hark , they roar .
Let them be hunted soundly .
At this hour Lie at my mercy all mine enemies .
Shortly shall all my labors end , and thou Shalt have the air at freedom .
For a little Follow , and do me service .
Now does my project gather to a head .
My charms crack not , my spirits obey , and time Goes upright with his carriage .
How's the day ?
On the sixth hour , at which time , my lord , You said our work should cease .
I did say so When first I raised the tempest .
Say , my spirit , How fares the king and 's followers ?
Confined together In the same fashion as you gave in charge , Just as you left them , all prisoners , sir , In the line grove which weather-fends your cell .
They can not budge till your release .
The king , His brother , and yours , abide all three distracted , And the remainder mourning over them , Brimful of sorrow and dismay .
But chiefly Him that you termed , sir , "the good old Lord Gonzalo , " His tears run down his beard like winter's drops From eaves of reeds .
Your charm so strongly works 'em That if you now beheld them , your affections Would become tender .
Dost thou think so , spirit ?
Mine would , sir , were I human .
And mine shall .
The rarer action is In virtue than in vengeance .
Go release them , Ariel .
My charms I'll break , their senses I'll restore , And they shall be themselves .
I'll fetch them , sir .
With his own bolt ; the strong-based promontory Have I made shake , and by the spurs plucked up The pine and cedar ; graves at my command Have waked their sleepers , oped , and let 'em forth By my so potent art .
But this rough magic I here abjure , and when I have required Some heavenly music , which even now I do , To work mine end upon their senses that This airy charm is for , I'll break my staff , Bury it certain fathoms in the earth , And deeper than did ever plummet sound I'll drown my book .
A solemn air and the best comforter To an unsettled fancy cure thy brains , Now useless , boiled within thy skull. , There stand , For you are spell-stopped. , Mine eyes , ev'n sociable to the show of thine , Fall fellowly drops .
Why , that's my dainty Ariel .
I shall miss thee , But yet thou shalt have freedom. , So , so , so. , To the king's ship , invisible as thou art .
All torment , trouble , wonder , and amazement Inhabits here .
This must crave , An if this be at all , a most strange story .
Thy dukedom I resign and do entreat Thou pardon me my wrongs .
But how should Prospero Be living and be here ?
Whether this be Or be not , I'll not swear .
Welcome , my friends all .
The devil speaks in him .
You the like loss ?
As great to me as late .
And supportable To make the dear loss have I means much weaker Than you may call to comfort you , for I Have lost my daughter .
A daughter ?
O heavens , that they were living both in Naples , The king and queen there !
That they were , I wish Myself were mudded in that oozy bed Where my son lies. , When did you lose your daughter ?
In this last tempest .
I perceive these lords At this encounter do so much admire That they devour their reason and scarce think Their eyes do offices of truth , their words Are natural breath. , But howsoev'r you have Been justled from your senses , know for certain That I am Prospero and that very duke Which was thrust forth of Milan , who most strangely Upon this shore where you were wracked , was landed , To be the lord on 't .
No , my dearest love , I would not for the world .
If this prove A vision of the Island , one dear son Shall I twice lose .
A most high miracle !
Now all the blessings Of a glad father , compass thee about .
Arise , and say how thou camest here .
Oh , wonder !
How many goodly creatures are there here !
How beauteous mankind is !
O brave new world , That has such people in 't !
Tis new to thee .
Sir , she is mortal .
But by immortal providence , she's mine .
I chose her when I could not ask my father For his advice , nor thought I had one .
She Is daughter to this famous Duke of Milan , Of whom so often I have heard renown But never saw before , of whom I have Received a second life .
And second father This lady makes him to me .
I am hers .
But oh , how oddly will it sound that I Must ask my child forgiveness !
There , sir , stop .
Let us not burden our remembrances with A heaviness that's gone .
Oh , my heart bleeds To think o ' th ' teen that I have turned you to , Which is from my remembrance !
Please you , farther .
My brother and thy uncle , called Antonio , I pray thee , mark me ( that a brother should Be so perfidious !
he whom next thyself Of all the world I loved and to him put The manage of my state , as at that time Through all the signories it was the first , And Prospero the prime duke , being so reputed In dignity , and for the liberal arts Without a parallel .
Those being all my study , The government I cast upon my brother And to my state grew stranger , being transported And rapt in secret studies .
Thy false uncle , Dost thou attend me ?
Sir , most heedfully .
O , good sir , I do .
Look down , you gods , And on this couple drop a blessed crown , For it is you that have chalked forth the way Which brought us hither .
I say amen , Gonzalo .
Was Milan thrust from Milan , that his issue Should become kings of Naples ?
O , rejoice Beyond a common joy , and set it down With gold on lasting pillars .
In one voyage Did Claribel her husband find at Tunis ; And Ferdinand , her brother , found a wife Where he himself was lost ; Prospero , his dukedom In a poor isle ; and all of us , ourselves When no man was his own .
Be it so .
Amen .
Oh , look , sir , look , sir !
Here is more of us .
The best news is that we have safely found Our king and company .
The next , our ship , Which , but three glasses since , we gave out split , Is tight and yare and bravely rigged as when We first put out to sea .
These are not natural events .
On a trice , so please you , Even in a dream were we divided from them And were brought moping hither .
This is as strange a maze as e'er men trod , And there is in this business more than nature Was ever conduct of .
Some oracle Must rectify our knowledge .
Sir , my liege , Do not infest your mind with beating on The strangeness of this business .
How fares my gracious sir ?
Coraggio , bully-monster , If these be true spies which I wear in my head , here's a goodly sight .
O Setebos , these be brave spirits indeed !
How fine my master is !
I am afraid He will chastise me .
Ha , ha !
What things are these , my lord Antonio ?
Will money buy 'em ?
I shall be pinched to death .
Is not this Stephano , my drunken butler ?
He is drunk now .
Where had he wine ?
And Trinculo is reeling ripe .
Why , how now , Stephano ?
O , touch me not .
I am not Stephano , but a cramp .
You'd be king o ' th ' isle , sirrah ?
I should have been a sore one then .
He is as disproportioned in his manners As in his shape. , Take with you your companions .
And I'll be wise hereafter And seek for grace .
What a thrice-double ass Was I , to take this drunkard for a god And worship this dull fool !
Go to , away .
Or stole it , rather .
And in the morn I'll bring you to your ship and so to Naples , Where I have hope to see the nuptial Of these our dear-beloved solemnized , And thence retire me to my Milan , where Every third thought shall be my grave .
I long To hear the story of your life , which must Take the ear strangely .
Now my charms are all o'erthrown , And what strength I have's mine own , Which is most faint .
Let me not , Since I have my dukedom got And pardoned the deceiver , dwell In this bare island by your spell , But release me from my bands With the help of your good hands .
As you from crimes would pardoned be , Let your indulgence set me free .
I pray thee , mark me .
I , thus neglecting worldly ends , all dedicated To closeness and the bettering of my mind With that which , but by being so retired , O'erprized all popular rate , in my false brother Awaked an evil nature .
And my trust , Like a good parent , did beget of him A falsehood in its contrary as great As my trust was , which had indeed no limit , A confidence sans bound .
Hence his ambition growing , Dost thou hear ?
Your tale , sir , would cure deafness .
Me , poor man , my library Was dukedom large enough .
Oh , the heavens !
Mark his condition and the event .
Then tell me If this might be a brother .
I should sin To think but nobly of my grandmother .
The King of Naples , being an enemy To me inveterate , hearkens my brother's suit , Which was that he , in lieu o ' th ' premises Of homage and I know not how much tribute , Should presently extirpate me and mine Out of the dukedom , and confer fair Milan With all the honors on my brother .
Alack , for pity !
I , not remembering how I cried out then , Will cry it o'er again .
It is a hint That wrings mine eyes to 't .
Hear a little further And then I'll bring thee to the present business Which now 's upon 's , without the which this story Were most impertinent .
Wherefore did they not That hour destroy us ?
Well demanded , wench .
My tale provokes that question .
Dear , they durst not , So dear the love my people bore me , nor set A mark so bloody on the business , but With colors fairer painted their foul ends .
Alack , what trouble Was I then to you !
Oh , a cherubim Thou wast that did preserve me .
Thou didst smile Infused with a fortitude from heaven , When I have decked the sea with drops full salt , Under my burthen groaned ; which raised in me An undergoing stomach to bear up Against what should ensue .
How came we ashore ?
By providence divine .
Some food we had and some fresh water that A noble Neapolitan , Gonzalo , Out of his charity , who being then appointed Master of this design , did give us , with Rich garments , linens , stuffs , and necessaries , Which since have steaded much .
So , of his gentleness , Knowing I loved my books , he furnished me From mine own library with volumes that I prize above my dukedom .
Would I might But ever see that man !
Now I arise .
Heavens thank you for 't !
And now , I pray you , sir , For still 'tis beating in my mind , your reason For raising this sea storm ?
Know thus far forth : By accident most strange , bountiful Fortune ( Now my dear lady ) hath mine enemies Brought to this shore .
Here cease more questions .
Tis a good dullness , And give it way .
I know thou canst not choose .
Come away , servant , come .
I am ready now .
Approach , my Ariel , come .
All hail , great master !
Grave sir , hail !
Hast thou , spirit , Performed to point the tempest that I bade thee ?
Sometime I'd divide , And burn in many places .
Jove's lightning , the precursors O ' th ' dreadful thunderclaps , more momentary And sight-outrunning were not .
My brave spirit !
Boatswain !
Here , master .
What cheer ?
Good , speak to th ' mariners .
Fall to 't yarely , or we run ourselves aground .
Where's the Master ?
Play the men .
I pray now , keep below .
Where is the Master , Boatswain ?
Not a soul But felt a fever of the mad and played Some tricks of desperation .
All but mariners Plunged in the foaming brine and quit the vessel , Then all afire with me .
The king's son , Ferdinand , With hair up-staring , then , like reeds , not hair , Was the first man that leaped , cried , "Hell is empty And all the devils are here." Why , that's my spirit !
But was not this nigh shore ?
Close by , my master .
But are they , Ariel , safe ?
Not a hair perished .
On their sustaining garments not a blemish , But fresher than before .
And , as thou badest me , In troops I have dispersed them 'bout the isle .
The king's son have I landed by himself , Whom I left cooling of the air with sighs In an odd angle of the isle , and sitting , His arms in this sad knot .
Of the king's ship , The mariners , say how thou hast disposed , And all the rest o ' th ' fleet .
The mariners all under hatches stowed , Who , with a charm joined to their suffered labor , I have left asleep .
And for the rest o ' th ' fleet , Which I dispersed , they all have met again And are upon the Mediterranean float , Bound sadly home for Naples , Supposing that they saw the king's ship wracked And his great person perish .
Ariel , thy charge Exactly is performed .
But there's more work .
What is the time o ' th ' day ?
Past the mid season .
At least two glasses .
The time 'twixt six and now Must by us both be spent most preciously .
Is there more toil ?
Since thou dost give me pains , Let me remember thee what thou hast promised , Which is not yet performed me .
How now ?
Moody ?
What is 't thou canst demand ?
My liberty .
Before the time be out ?
No more !
I prithee , Remember I have done thee worthy service , Told thee no lies , made thee no mistakings , served Without or grudge or grumblings .
Thou didst promise To bate me a full year .
Dost thou forget From what a torment I did free thee ?
No .
Thou dost , and think'st it much to tread the ooze Of the salt deep , To run upon the sharp wind of the north , To do me business in the veins o ' th ' earth When it is baked with frost .
I do not , sir .
Thou liest , malignant thing !
Hast thou forgot The foul witch Sycorax , who with age and envy Was grown into a hoop ?
Hast thou forgot her ?
No , sir .
Thou hast .
Where was she born ?
Speak .
Tell me .
Sir , in Argier .
Oh , was she so ?
I must Once in a month recount what thou hast been , Which thou forget'st .
This damned witch Sycorax , For mischiefs manifold and sorceries terrible To enter human hearing , from Argier , Thou know'st , was banished .
For one thing she did They would not take her life .
Is not this true ?
Ay , sir .
This blue-eyed hag was hither brought with child And here was left by th ' sailors .
Thou , my slave , As thou report'st thyself , wast then her servant .
And , for thou wast a spirit too delicate To act her earthy and abhorred commands , Refusing her grand hests , she did confine thee , By help of her more potent ministers And in her most unmitigable rage , Into a cloven pine , within which rift Imprisoned thou didst painfully remain A dozen years ; within which space she died And left thee there , where thou didst vent thy groans As fast as mill wheels strike .
Dull thing , I say so .
He , that Caliban Whom now I keep in service .
It was mine art , When I arrived and heard thee , that made gape The pine and let thee out .
I thank thee , master .
If thou more murmur'st , I will rend an oak And peg thee in his knotty entrails till Thou hast howled away twelve winters .
Pardon , master .
I will be correspondent to command And do my spiriting gently .
Do so , and after two days I will discharge thee .
That's my noble master !
What shall I do ?
Say , what ?
What shall I do ?
Go make thyself like a nymph o ' th ' sea .
Be subject To no sight but thine and mine , invisible To every eyeball else .
Go take this shape And hither come in 't .
Go hence with diligence .
Shake it off .
Come on .
We'll visit Caliban , my slave who never Yields us kind answer .
But as 'tis , We can not miss him .
He does make our fire , Fetch in our wood , and serves in offices That profit us. , What , ho !
Slave !
Caliban !
Speak .
Come forth , I say !
There's other business for thee .
Come , thou tortoise !
Fine apparition !
My quaint Ariel , Hark in thine ear .
My lord it shall be done .
As wicked dew as e'er my mother brushed With raven's feather from unwholesome fen Drop on you both !
A southwest blow on ye And blister you all o'er !
For this , be sure , tonight thou shalt have cramps , Side-stitches that shall pen thy breath up .
Urchins Shall , forth at vast of night that they may work , All exercise on thee .
Thou shalt be pinched As thick as honeycomb , each pinch more stinging Than bees that made 'em .
I must eat my dinner .
This island's mine , by Sycorax my mother , Which thou takest from me .
Cursed be I that did so !
Thou most lying slave , Whom stripes may move , not kindness !
I have used thee , Filth as thou art , with human care , and lodged thee In mine own cell till thou didst seek to violate The honor of my child .
Oh ho , oh ho !
Would 't had been done !
Thou didst prevent me .
Abhorred slave , Which any print of goodness wilt not take , Being capable of all ill !
I pitied thee , Took pains to make thee speak , taught thee each hour One thing or other .
But thy vile race , Though thou didst learn , had that in 't which good natures Could not abide to be with .
Therefore wast thou Deservedly confined into this rock , Who hadst deserved more than a prison .
You taught me language , and my profit on 't Is I know how to curse .
The red plague rid you For learning me your language !
No , pray thee .
So , slave , hence !
The watchdogs bark .
Hark , hark !
I hear The strain of strutting chanticleer Cry "Cock-a-diddle-dow." Where should this music be ?
I ' th ' air or th ' earth ?
It sounds no more , and sure , it waits upon Some god o ' th ' island .
Sitting on a bank , Weeping again the king my father's wrack , This music crept by me upon the waters , Allaying both their fury and my passion With its sweet air .
Thence I have followed it , Or it hath drawn me rather .
But 'tis gone .
No , it begins again .
Hark , now I hear them .
The ditty does remember my drowned father .
I hear it now above me .
What is 't ?
A spirit ?
Lord , how it looks about !
Believe me , sir , It carries a brave form .
But 'tis a spirit .
No , wench !
It eats and sleeps and hath such senses As we have , such .
He hath lost his fellows And strays about to find 'em .
Do you not hear him ?
You mar our labor .
Keep your cabins .
You do assist the storm .
Nay , good , be patient .
Hence !
To cabin , silence !
Trouble us not .
Good , yet remember whom thou hast aboard .
None that I more love than myself .
You are a councilor .
Use your authority .
If you can not , give thanks you have lived so long and make yourself ready in your cabin for the mischance of the hour , if it so hap. , Cheerly , good hearts ! , Out of our way , I say .
I have great comfort from this fellow .
I might call him A thing divine , for nothing natural I ever saw so noble .
No wonder , sir , But certainly a maid .
My language !
Heavens , I am the best of them that speak this speech , Were I but where 'tis spoken .
How ?
The best ?
What wert thou if the King of Naples heard thee ?
A single thing , as I am now , that wonders To hear thee speak of Naples .
He does hear me , And that he does I weep .
Myself am Naples , Who with mine eyes , never since at ebb , beheld The king my father wracked .
Alack , for mercy !
Yes , faith , and all his lords , the Duke of Milan And his brave son being twain .
Soft , sir !
One word more .
If the ill spirit have so fair a house , Good things will strive to dwell with 't .
What , I say ?
Come from thy ward , For I can here disarm thee with this stick And make thy weapon drop .
Beseech you , father .
Hence !
Hang not on my garments .
Sir , have pity , I'll be his surety .
Silence !
One word more Shall make me chide thee , if not hate thee .
What , An advocate for an imposter ?
Hush , Thou think'st there is no more such shapes as he , Having seen but him and Caliban .
Foolish wench , To th ' most of men this is a Caliban And they to him are angels .
My affections Are then most humble .
I have no ambition To see a goodlier man .
So they are .
My spirits , as in a dream , are all bound up .
My father's loss , the weakness which I feel , The wrack of all my friends , nor this man's threats , To whom I am subdued , are but light to me , Might I but through my prison once a day Behold this maid .
Space enough Have I in such a prison .
Prithee , peace .
A dollar .
Dolor comes to him , indeed .
You have spoken truer than you purposed .
You have taken it wiselier than I meant you should .
Well , I have done .
But yet , Which , of he or Adrian , for a good wager , first begins to crow ?
The old cock .
The cockerel .
Done .
The wager ?
A laughter .
A match !
Though this island seem to be desert ,
It must needs be of subtle , tender , and delicate temperance .
Temperance was a delicate wench .
Ay , and a subtle , as he most learnedly delivered .
The air breathes upon us here most sweetly .
Or as 'twere perfumed by a fen .
Here is everything advantageous to life .
True .
Save means to live .
Of that there's none , or little .
How lush and lusty the grass looks !
How green !
The ground indeed is tawny .
With an eye of green in 't .
He misses not much .
No , he doth but mistake the truth totally .
But the rarity of it is , which is indeed almost beyond credit , As many vouched rarities are .
That our garments , being , as they were , drenched in the sea , hold notwithstanding their freshness and glosses , being rather new-dyed than stained with salt water .
Ay , or very falsely pocket up his report .
Methinks our garments are now as fresh as when we put them on first in Afric , at the marriage of the king's fair daughter Claribel to the King of Tunis .
Twas a sweet marriage , and we prosper well in our return .
Tunis was never graced before with such a paragon to their queen .
Widow Dido" said you ?
You make me study of that .
She was of Carthage , not of Tunis .
Carthage ?
I assure you , Carthage .
His word is more than the miraculous harp .
What impossible matter will he make easy next ?
I think he will carry this island home in his pocket and give it his son for an apple .
And sowing the kernels of it in the sea , bring forth more islands .
Ay .
Why , in good time .
Down with the topmast !
Yare , lower , lower !
Bring her to try wi ' th ' main course .
A plague upon this howling !
They are louder than the weather or our office .
Yet again ?
What do you here ?
Shall we give o'er and drown ?
Have you a mind to sink ?
I'll warrant him for drowning though the ship were no stronger than a nutshell and as leaky as an unstanched wench .
Lay her a-hold , a-hold !
All lost !
To prayers , to prayers , all lost !
And the rarest that e'er came there .
Bate , I beseech you , widow Dido .
Oh , widow Dido ?
Ay , widow Dido .
Is not , sir , my doublet as fresh as the first day I wore it ?
I mean , in a sort .
That "sort" was well fished for .
When I wore it at your daughter's marriage ?
You cram these words into mine ears against The stomach of my sense .
Sir , he may live .
I not doubt He came alive to land .
No , no , he's gone .
Prithee , peace .
You were kneeled to and importuned otherwise By all of us , and the fair soul herself Weighed between loathness and obedience , at Which end o ' th ' beam should bow .
We have lost your son , I fear , forever .
Milan and Naples have More widows in them of this business ' making Than we bring men to comfort them .
The fault's your own .
So is the dearest o ' th ' loss .
My lord Sebastian , The truth you speak doth lack some gentleness And time to speak it in .
You rub the sore When you should bring the plaster .
Very well .
And most chirurgeonly .
Foul weather ?
Very foul .
Had I plantation of this isle , my lord , He'd sow 't with nettle seed .
Or docks , or mallows .
And were the king on 't , what would I do ?
Scape being drunk for want of wine .
For no kind of traffic Would I admit .
No occupation .
No sovereignty , Yet he would be king on 't .
All things in common nature should produce Without sweat or endeavor .
But nature should bring forth Of its own kind all foison , all abundance , To feed my innocent people .
No marrying 'mong his subjects ?
None , man .
Prithee , no more .
Thou dost talk nothing to me .
Twas you we laughed at .
What a blow was there given !
An it had not fallen flat-long .
You are gentlemen of brave mettle .
You would lift the moon out of her sphere if she would continue in it five weeks without changing .
We would so , and then go a-batfowling .
No , I warrant you .
Go sleep , and hear us .
What , all so soon asleep ?
I wish mine eyes Would with themselves shut up my thoughts .
Please you , sir , Do not omit the heavy offer of it .
It seldom visits sorrow .
We two , my lord , Will guard your person while you take your rest And watch your safety .
Thank you .
Wondrous heavy .
What a strange drowsiness possesses them !
It is the quality o ' th ' climate .
Why Doth it not then our eyelids sink ?
I find not Myself disposed to sleep .
Nor I .
My spirits are nimble .
They fell together all , as by consent .
Th ' occasion speaks thee , and My strong imagination sees a crown Dropping upon thy head .
What , art thou waking ?
Do you not hear me speak ?
I do , and surely It is a sleepy language , and thou speak'st Out of thy sleep .
What is it thou didst say ?
Thou dost snore distinctly .
There's meaning in thy snores .
I'll teach you how to flow .
Do so .
Oh , If you but knew how you the purpose cherish Whiles thus you mock it !
How , in stripping it , You more invest it !
Ebbing men indeed Most often do so near the bottom run By their own fear or sloth .
Prithee , say on .
I have no hope That he's undrowned .
Oh , out of that "no hope" What great hope have you !
No hope that way is Another way so high a hope that even Ambition can not pierce a wink beyond , But doubt discovery there .
Will you grant with me That Ferdinand is drowned ?
He's gone .
Then , tell me , Who's the next heir of Naples ?
Claribel .
Tis true , my brother's daughter's Queen of Tunis , So is she heir of Naples , 'twixt which regions There is some space .
I myself could make A chough of as deep chat .
Oh , that you bore The mind that I do , what a sleep were this For your advancement !
Methinks I do .
And how does your content Tender your own good fortune ?
I remember You did supplant your brother Prospero .
My brother's servants Were then my fellows .
Now they are my men .
But , for your conscience ?
Ay , sir .
But I feel not This deity in my bosom .
Should not upbraid our course .
For all the rest , They'll take suggestion as a cat laps milk .
They'll tell the clock to any business that We say befits the hour .
Thy case , dear friend , Shall be my precedent .
As thou got'st Milan , I'll come by Naples .
Draw thy sword .
One stroke Shall free thee from the tribute which thou payest .
And I the king shall love thee .
Draw together .
And when I rear my hand , do you the like , To fall it on Gonzalo .
O , but one word .
What , must our mouths be cold ?
The king and prince at prayers .
I'm out of patience .
He'll be hanged yet , though every drop of water swear against it and gape at widest to glut him .
Let's all sink wi ' th ' king .
Let's take leave of him .
Then let us both be sudden .
Why are you drawn ?
Wherefore this ghastly looking ?
What's the matter ?
Whiles we stood here securing your repose , Even now , we heard a hollow burst of bellowing Like bulls , or rather lions .
Did 't not wake you ?
It struck mine ear most terribly .
I heard nothing .
Oh , 'twas a din to fright a monster's ear , To make an earthquake !
Sure , it was the roar Of a whole herd of lions .
Heard you this , Gonzalo ?
Upon mine honor , sir , I heard a humming , And that a strange one too , which did awake me .
I shaked you , sir , and cried .
As mine eyes opened , I saw their weapons drawn .
There was a noise , That's verily .
Let's draw our weapons .
Heavens keep him from these beasts !
For he is , sure , i ' th ' island .
Lead away .
His spirits hear me And yet I needs must curse .
But they'll nor pinch , Fright me with urchin-shows , pitch me i ' th ' mire , Nor lead me like a firebrand in the dark Out of my way , unless he bid 'em .
Sometime am I All wound with adders who with cloven tongues Do hiss me into madness .
Lo , now , lo !
Perchance he will not mind me .
Here's neither bush nor shrub to bear off any weather at all .
And another storm brewing , I hear it sing i ' th ' wind .
Yond same black cloud , yond huge one , looks like a foul bombard that would shed his liquor .
A strange fish !
Were I in England now , as once I was , and had but this fish painted , not a holiday fool there but would give a piece of silver .
There would this monster make a man .
Any strange beast there makes a man .
When they will not give a doit to relieve a lame beggar , they will lay out ten to see a dead Indian .
Legged like a man and his fins like arms !
Warm , o ' my troth .
I do now let loose my opinion , hold it no longer : this is no fish , but an islander that hath lately suffered by a thunderbolt .
Alas , the storm is come again !
My best way is to creep under his gaberdine .
There is no other shelter hereabouts .
Misery acquaints a man with strange bedfellows .
I will here shroud till the dregs of the storm be past .
This is a very scurvy tune to sing at a man's funeral .
Well , here's my comfort .
Do not torment me .
Oh !
What's the matter ?
Have we devils here ?
Do you put tricks upon 's with savages and men of Ind , ha ?
I have not 'scaped drowning to be afeard now of your four legs .
The spirit torments me .
Oh !
This is some monster of the isle with four legs who hath got , as I take it , an ague .
Where the devil should he learn our language ?
I will give him some relief if it be but for that .
If I can recover him and keep him tame and get to Naples with him , he's a present for any emperor that ever trod on neat's leather .
Do not torment me , prithee .
I'll bring my wood home faster .
He's in his fit now and does not talk after the wisest .
He shall taste of my bottle .
If he have never drunk wine afore , it will go near to remove his fit .
If I can recover him and keep him tame , I will not take too much for him .
He shall pay for him that hath him , and that soundly .
I have half a mind to hit you before you speak again .
But if Antony is alive , healthy , friendly with Caesar , and not Caesar's prisoner , I'll shower you with gold and pearls .
Madam , he's well .
That's well spoken .
And he's friendly with Caesar .
You are an honest man .
Caesar and he are better friends than ever .
I'm going to make you a rich man .
But yet , madam , I don't like the sound of "but yet." It reverses all the good that came before it .
Damn those words , "but yet ! " "But yet" is like a jailer about to bring out some horrible criminal .
Please , my friend , give me all the news , both good and bad , at the same time .
You say he's friendly with Caesar , healthy , and free .
I didn't say free , madam .
No , I didn't say that .
He's bound to Octavia .
For what favor ?
For the favor of sleeping in her bed .
I'm sick , Charmian .
He's married to Octavia , madam .
May you die of the worst disease !
Good madam , be patient .
What did you say to me ?
Get out , you horrible bastard , or I'll gouge out your eyes .
I'll scalp you .
I'll have you whipped with wire and soaked in brine like a pickle , making your pain linger .
If you say it isn't true , I'll give you a province and make you rich .
The blows I gave you already will make up for your upsetting me .
He's married , madam .
Rogue , you've lived too long !
No way , then , I'll run .
What's the matter with you , madam ?
I haven't done anything to you .
Good madam , restrain yourself .
The man hasn't done anything wrong .
Even innocents can not always escape disaster .
May Egypt drown in the Nile and all good creatures turn into poisonous snakes .
Call that servant back .
Even though I'm mad , I won't bite him .
Call him !
He's afraid to come in .
I won't hurt him .
My hands are tainted if they hit an inferior , especially since I myself am the cause of my own distress .
Come here , sir .
It may be honest , but it's never wise to bring bad news .
You can give good news in many ways , but let bad news interpret itself as you tell it .
I've only done my duty .
Is he married ?
May the gods destroy you !
Do you maintain the same story ?
Do you want me to lie , madam ?
Go , get out !
Even if you were as handsome as I beg your highness' pardon .
Is he really married ?
Please don't be offended that I don't want to offend you any more .
It's not fair to punish me for something you make me do .
He's married to Octavia .
It's too bad that Antony's fault should make you look like a jerk .
Go away .
The merchandise you bring from Rome is too expensive for me .
Let it stay in your inventory until it bankrupts you .
Be patient , your highness .
When I have praised Antony , I've disparaged Caesar .
Many times , madam .
I'm being repaid for that now .
Help me out of here .
Oh , Iras , Charmian !
It doesn't matter .
How old is she ?
Don't let him leave out the color of her hair .
Bring me his answers quickly .
Even though half of him is like a
Lord Alexas , sweet Alexas , most anything Alexas , almost the most consummate Alexas , where's the fortuneteller you recommended so highly to the Queen ?
Oh , I only wish I knew the name of that husband you said he predicted will have a cheating wife !
I don't make fortunes ; I only see them .
Then see a good one for me .
No , he means you'll use makeup when you're old .
May my wrinkles forbid that !
Don't joke about his predictions .
Pay attention .
Quiet !
You will love more than you are loved .
It's proper that we speak first , which is why we sent our proposals ahead of us for your consideration .
Why did Cassius conspire against Caesar ?
Take your time .
Pompey , you can not frighten us with your navy .
We'll meet you at sea .
Yes , on land you do outnumber me .
Even more since you annexed my father's house and lands .
But since , To get back to the matter at hand , what do you think of our proposal ?
That's the point .
Don't let us talk you into anything , but consider carefully the value of our offers .
You have offered me the lands of Sicily and Sardinia .
In return , I must clear the sea of pirates and send tributes of wheat to Rome .
If I agree to this , we may leave unharmed , with our shields undented .
That's our offer .
You should know that when I came here I was prepared to accept your offer .
Let me shake your hand .
I didn't think I would see you here .
The East is very seductive .
Well , I can not tell how my difficult life has weathered my face , but I will never let those difficulties subdue my courage .
It's good we had this meeting .
I hope it works out for the best , Lepidus .
So we are in agreement .
That's the next thing on the agenda .
We'll have celebration feasts for each other before we go our separate ways .
I'll give the first one , Pompey .
No , Antony .
Whether your banquet is first or last , your Egyptian cooking will make it the best .
I heard that Julius Caesar got fat from all the feasting there .
You've heard a lot .
I mean well , sir .
I'm sure you do .
I've heard a lot more .
I heard that Apollodorus carried , What did he carry , please ?
How are you , soldier ?
I'm well , and probably will be for a while , as I hear that four feasts are being prepared .
Let me shake your hand .
I've never been your enemy .
I've seen you fight and envied your skill .
Sir , I wouldn't say I was your friend , but I've praised you when you deserved ten times more praise than I gave .
Enjoy your frankness ; it suits you .
I invite you all aboard my ship .
After you , my lords ?
Show us the way , sir .
Come with me .
I think it was at sea .
That it was , sir .
You've done well at sea .
And you've done well on land .
I'll flatter anyone who flatters me , though what I've accomplished on land can not be denied .
Neither can my accomplishments at sea .
Yes , for your own safety , you should deny one thing : you have been a great thief at sea .
As you were on land .
That's the one part of my service on land I do deny .
But let's shake hands , Menas .
If our eyes were policemen , they might capture two thieves at once while we're embracing .
Men's faces are truthful , whatever their hands do .
But no beautiful woman has an honest face .
That's no lie .
They steal hearts .
We came here to fight against you .
For my part , I'm sorry this battle turned into a drinking match .
Today Pompey laughs away his fortune .
If that's true , he won't get it back by crying .
That's the truth , sir .
We didn't expect Mark Antony to be here .
Is he married to Cleopatra ?
Caesar's sister is named Octavia .
That's true , sir .
She was previously Caius Marcellus' wife .
But she is now Mark Antony's wife .
Excuse me , sir ?
It's true .
Then Caesar and he will always be united .
If I were to make a prediction regarding this union , I wouldn't say that .
I think the marriage was made more for political reasons than for love .
I think so too .
But you'll see that the very thing that joins them will be the thing that separates them .
Octavia has a pious , chaste , meek disposition .
Doesn't everyone want a wife like that ?
Not someone who doesn't share that disposition , meaning Mark Antony .
He'll go back to his Egyptian dish .
Then Octavia's complaints will rouse Caesar , and as I said before , the thing that brought them together will part them .
Antony will go where his passion is .
He only married out of political necessity .
Then that's the way it may turn out .
Come on , sir , will you come aboard ?
I want to drink your health .
I'll join you , sir .
We did a lot of drinking in Egypt .
Let's go .
Here's where they'll end up , on the floor .
Some of them are leaning already .
Lepidus is red in the face .
They made him drink the leftover wine usually given to the poor .
I'd rather carry a reed that obviously can't protect me than a sword I can not lift .
This is how they do it , sir : they measure the depth of the Nile , according to certain marks made on the walls of the Pyramid .
They know by those measurements if there will be famine or plenty .
The higher the Nile flows , the better the harvest .
The harvest comes shortly after that .
Do you have unusual snakes there ?
Yes , Lepidus .
The Egyptian snake is born when the sun shines on the Nile mud , just like the crocodile .
I don't feel so well , but I won't stop .
Not until you pass out .
I'm afraid you'll keep going until then .
I've heard that the pyramids build by the Ptolemies are splendid .
Without doubt I've heard that .
What does a crocodile look like ?
Sir , it's shaped like itself and is as wide as it has width .
It is only as high as it is and moves with its own legs .
Its own color .
It's a strange snake .
It is that .
And its tears are wet .
What is it ?
I've always had great respect for your destiny .
You've served me faithfully .
What else can I say ?
What are you saying ?
Would you like to be king of the entire world ?
Now I've said it twice .
How could that happen ?
Just listen to him .
Be kind now and tell me some excellent fortune .
Tell me that I'll marry three kings before noon and be widowed by all of them .
Oh , excellent !
Then my children will probably be illegitimate .
Tell me , please : how many boys and girls will I have ?
If every time you wished for a child you could have had one , you would have a million children .
You seem to think no one outside of your bedroom knows what you wish .
We'll all want our fortune told .
My fortune , like that of many of us tonight , is to go drunk to bed .
Are you drunk ?
No , Pompey , I haven't had anything to drink .
Tell me how .
The three who share the known world are aboard your boat .
Everything that belongs to them is yours .
Oh , you should have done it without telling me !
For you to do it would be good service .
You should know that to me , profit isn't more important than honor , but the other way around .
Regret that your mouth betrayed your actions .
But now I must condemn it .
Give it up and go drink .
This toast is for Lepidus !
Here's to you , Menas .
I accept with thanks , Enobarbus .
There goes a strong fellow , Menas .
Why do you say that ?
He carries a third of the world .
Can't you see that ?
Then a third of the world is drunk .
Drink up .
All right , then .
This hasn't reached the level of an Egyptian feast yet .
It's getting there .
Clink your cups together in a toast !
Here's to Caesar .
I could do without another toast .
Live in the moment .
But I would rather abstain from everything for four days than drink so much in one .
Let's have one , good soldier .
Come , let's join our hands until the overpowering wine makes us soft and forgetful .
Everyone join hands .
How can you top that ?
Good night , Pompey .
Yes , we will .
Let's shake on it .
We're friends !
Come , this way to the rowboat .
Be careful not to fall in .
Menas , I'm not going back on shore .
No , come to my cabin .
What do you say ?
There's my hat !
Hooray !
Come on , noble captain .
Now I've paid you back , Parthia , and gotten revenge for Marcus Crassus' death .
You must understand , Silius , that it's better to leave something undone than achieve too much fame in your superior's absence .
Caesar and Antony have always achieved more by delegating authority to their officers than by leading their troops in person .
A man who achieves more in war than his captain does becomes his captain's rival .
I could do more to help Antony , but to do so would insult him .
A soldier is just a tool , like his sword , unless he has your qualities , Ventidius .
Are you going to write Antony about this ?
I'll write how , under his flag and with his well-paid troops , we have beaten the formerly unvanquished Parthia .
Where's Antony now ?
Did the brothers-in-law leave ?
They finished their business with Pompey , and Pompey has left .
Octavia weeps at the thought of leaving Rome .
Caesar is in a sober mood .
He's a stylish man .
And how he loves Caesar !
Yes , but how he adores Mark Antony !
Caesar ?
Then what's Antony ?
A god of a god ?
Are you talking about Caesar ?
He's without equal !
Oh , Antony !
Oh , you If you want to praise Caesar , just say his name , that's all the praise that's necessary .
He certainly flattered them both with extravagant compliments .
He loves Caesar best , but he also loves Antony .
Oh !
Hearts can not think it , tongues can not speak it , meas-urements can not calculate it , scribes can not write it , bards can not sing it , and poets can not make verses about it .
He loves them both .
They are his dung , and he their beetle .
So , there's the signal to ride .
Good-bye , noble Agrippa .
Good luck , worthy soldier , and good-bye .
You can't go any further with us , sir .
If you and I don't value her equally , it would be better for us to work out our differences without her .
Don't insult me with your distrust .
I mean what I say .
You won't find any cause for anxiety , even if you look for one .
So , may the gods protect you and change the hearts of the Romans so that they turn and give you their support .
We'll leave you here .
Good-bye , my dearest sister , good-bye .
I hope you have good weather to set your mind at ease .
Farewell .
My noble brother !
Her eyes are like April : full of showers .
What is it , Octavia ?
I'll tell you privately .
See , now I have you .
And thus I let you go and give you to the gods .
Good-bye .
Be happy .
Farewell , farewell .
Farewell .
Like the Oh stop it , you lusty bed-hopper .
You can't see the future .
Well , if a moist palm isn't a clear sign of promiscuity , then I can't scratch my own ear .
Your fortunes are the same .
But how ?
Give me details .
I've said what I have to say .
Isn't my fortune just a little better than hers ?
Well , if you could have just an inch of better fortune than me , where would you like the improvement ?
Not in my husband's nose .
May heaven save us from indecent thoughts !
Alexas !
If it's sad to see a handsome man with a cheating wife , it's a tragedy to see an ugly thug with a wife who's faithful .
Therefore , dear Isis , do the right thing and give him the fortune he deserves .
Where is that messenger ?
He's afraid to come in .
Oh , come on. , Come here , sir .
Gracious Queen , even Herod of Judea wouldn't dare look at you unless you were in a good mood .
I'll have Herod's head chopped off !
Most formidable Queen !
Did you see Octavia ?
Yes , revered Queen .
Where ?
In Rome , Madam .
I saw her face as she walked with her brother and Mark Antony .
Is she as tall as I am ?
She is not , madam .
Did you hear her speak ?
Is her voice pitched high or low ?
Madam , I heard her speak .
She has a low-pitched voice .
That's not in her favor .
He can't like her very long .
Like her ?
Oh , Isis , that's impossible .
You're right , Charmian .
She creeps along .
She has a body , not a life .
Is this true ?
If not , then I have no powers of observation .
There aren't three people in all of Egypt who could do better .
She doesn't have anything going for her so far .
This messenger is wise .
Very wise .
Do you hear that , Charmian ?
And I think she's at least thirty .
Do you remember her face ?
Was it long or round ?
Round enough to be unattractive .
Usually that means a person is foolish .
What color is her hair ?
Brown , madam , and she wouldn't want her forehead to be any lower .
You mustn't hold my earlier outburst against me .
I'll hire you again to go back to Rome .
My letters are ready to go .
He's an admirable man .
He certainly is .
I'm very sorry I was so hard on him .
Not a bit , madam .
Everything may still be all right .
I assure you it is , madam .
Oh , dear husband , don't believe everything you hear , or if you must believe it , don't let it all make you angry .
No lady could be more miserable than I if you two disagree .
Gentle Octavia , support the one that supports you .
In the meantime , I'll raise an army that will surpass his .
May the god of power make me , the weakest of the weak , your mediator .
When you find out who started this disagreement , turn your anger upon them .
Order supplies for your trip and choose your traveling companions .
How goes it , friend Eros ?
Some startling news has just arrived , sir .
What news , man ?
Caesar and Lepidus declared war against Pompey .
That's old news .
Who's winning ?
So the weak third of the triumvirate is imprisoned until death frees him .
And even if you throw everything you possess to the two of them , they'll battle each other to the death to have it all .
Where's Antony ?
Another thing , Domitius : Antony wants to see you now .
I should have waited to tell you my news .
But never mind .
Take me to Antony .
Come with me , sir .
In Alexandria he condemned Rome , and that's not all .
This is what happened : he and Cleopatra sat on chairs of gold on a silver-covered stage in the marketplace .
He did this in public ?
He gave Syria , Cilicia , and Phoenicia to Ptolemy .
Let's send this news to Rome .
The Roman people are fed up with his arrogance already .
The people have heard it already , and they've been told of his accusations .
Who does he accuse ?
He accuses me of withholding his share of Sextus Pompeius' possessions , which we seized in Sicily .
Then he says I didn't return some ships he loaned me .
Sir , these accusations should be answered .
It has been done already , and the messenger is on his way .
I answered that Lepidus had become too brutal and abused his position .
He'll never agree to that .
Then we won't agree to his demands .
Greetings , Caesar , my lord !
Greetings , dearest Caesar !
Oh , to think you've been rejected !
You've never thought of me like that , and you have no reason to .
Then why did you travel so quietly ?
You didn't arrive like Caesar's sister .
Antony's wife should have an army to escort her , with neighing horses to announce her arrival long before she appears .
The dust from your attending troops should have risen to heaven .
I would have met you by sea and again by land .
Mark Antony heard that you were preparing to wage war on him .
Which he quickly allowed , given that you're an obstacle to his lust .
Amen .
Quiet !
Here comes Antony .
Have you seen my lord ?
No , lady .
Wasn't he here ?
No , madam .
He was in a good mood , and then suddenly he started thinking of Rome .
Madam ?
Here , at your service .
Here comes my lord .
Your wife , Fulvia , mustered her army first .
Against my brother Lucius ?
Yes .
Don't say that , my lord .
Where do you think he is now ?
He's in Athens , my lord .
No , he's not .
Cleopatra summoned him .
He's given his empire to a whore , and now they're gathering kings to wage a war .
He's recruited Bocchus , the King of Libya ; Archelaus of Cappadocia ; Philadelphos , King of Paphlagonia ; the Thracian king , Adallas ; King Manchus of Arabia ; the King of Pont ; Herod , of Judea ; Mithridates , King of Comagen ; Polemon and Amyntas , the kings of Mede and Lycaonia , and many more .
I'm divided between two friends who are determined to kill each other .
You're welcome here .
I didn't write about breaking the alliance with Antony until I saw you were being misled and realized how dangerous it would be to keep postponing preparations .
Cheer yourself .
You will always be welcome to me .
Welcome , lady .
Welcome , dear madam .
Every heart in Rome loves and pities you .
Only the adulterous and abominable Antony abandons you , giving his power to a whore who turns that power against us .
It's undeniable .
You are welcome here , sister .
I beg you to continue to be patient .
My dearest sister !
But why , why , why ?
You opposed my taking part in the war .
Isn't this war against me ?
Why shouldn't I be there in person ?
What do you mean ?
Let Rome fall !
May the tongues of our critics rot !
I have responsibilities in this war , and as the absolute ruler of my kingdom I will carry out my duties as if I were a man .
Don't argue against it .
I won't stay behind .
No , I've had my say .
Here comes the Emperor .
Isn't it strange , Canidius , that he could cross the Ionian Sea so quickly from Tarentum and Brundusium and take Toryne ? , Have you heard about this , sweet ?
No one admires speed more than the lazy .
What else ?
Why do you want to do that , my lord ?
Because he's daring us to do it .
So you've dared him to single combat .
Yes , and you dared Caesar to fight the battle at Pharsalia , where he fought against Pompey .
But Caesar ignores offers that don't give him an advantage , and so should you .
His ships are maneuverable .
Yours are slow and awkward .
Refusing to fight him at sea won't disgrace you .
I'll fight at sea .
Even if we fail at that , we can still fight him on land .
What's your business ?
The news is true , my lord .
He has captured Toryne .
Canidius , take our nineteen
What's the news , brave soldier ?
Oh , don't fight by sea , noble Emperor !
Don't trust rotten planks .
Don't you trust my sword and these wounds ?
Let the Egyptians and Phoenicians go swimming .
We are used to winning by standing on the earth and fighting toe to toe .
Well , well , let's go .
By Hercules , I think I'm right .
Soldier , you are .
Our leader is being led .
On land you keep the legions and cavalry together , don't you ?
Marcus Octavius , Marcus Justeius , Publicola , and Caelius will go by sea , but we'll keep the bulk on land .
Caesar's speed defies belief .
While he was still in Rome , he deployed his forces in so many different disguises that all our spies were fooled .
Who's his lieutenant , do you know ?
A man named Taurus , they say .
I know the man well .
The Emperor is calling for Canidius .
The present time is like a woman in labor , each minute giving birth to some piece of news .
Taurus !
My lord ?
Don't attack by land .
Don't provoke them to battle until we have finished at sea .
Our fate depends on this chance .
Assemble our squadrons on the other side of the hill , in sight of Caesar's navy .
I can't watch any more .
The Egyptian flagship , the Gods and goddesses , the whole congregation of them !
What's wrong with you ?
We have lost a major portion of the world through utter foolishness .
We have kissed away entire kingdoms and provinces .
How goes the battle ?
Right in the middle of the fight , just when the battle could have gone either way , actually we had a slight advantage , that immoral Egyptian nag , May she die of leprosy ! , suddenly became frightened , and turned her ships around and fled .
I saw that .
The sight made me so sick I couldn't watch any more .
Well , give me the worst news .
The bearer of bad news is often blamed for it .
Only if the hearer is a fool or a coward .
Go on .
As far as I'm concerned , what's past is done .
It's like this : as long as a person tells me the truth , even though it means my death , I will listen as though he praised me .
Oh , my lord !
Speak plainly .
Call Cleopatra what the Romans call her .
It's easy to err when left to our own devices , but criticism helps us to see our faults and correct them .
Good-bye for a while .
I never saw such a shameful act .
Terrible .
Terrible .
The battle on the sea is almost lost .
If our general had been his old self , we would have won .
Oh , with his sordid desertion , he sets the example for our own .
Are you considering desertion , as well ?
Then everything must really be finished .
They fled toward Peloponnesus .
I'll yield my legions and cavalry to Caesar .
Listen .
Friends , come here .
I'm completely lost .
I have a ship full of treasure .
Escape and make peace with Caesar .
Flee ?
Not us .
I've told cowards to turn their backs on me and run .
Friends , go .
I've decided on a plan that doesn't require your assistance .
Leave .
Oh , I followed something I'm ashamed to look at now !
Even my hair revolts .
Friends , go .
I'll give you letters of introduction to some friends of mine who will help you .
Please , don't be sad , and don't tell me how reluctant you are .
Take your cues from my own despair .
Abandon the person that has abandoned himself .
Go to the harbor immediately !
I'll give you the title to that ship and its treasure .
Just give me a moment , please , only a moment .
I've relinquished my authority , so please , I'll see you all before long .
What else ?
Let me sit down .
Oh , damn , damn , damn !
Madam !
Madam , oh , good Empress !
The Queen is here , my lord .
Go to him , madam , speak to him .
He's not himself because he feels so ashamed .
Well , then , help me .
Most noble sir , stand up .
The Queen is coming .
She's weak and will die unless you comfort her .
I've destroyed my reputation , a most shameful error .
Sir , here's the Queen .
Oh , where have you led me , Egypt ?
Oh , my lord , my lord , forgive my panic !
I didn't think you would follow me .
Queen , you knew very well that my heart was tied to your ship and that you would pull me along with you .
You knew that my spirit was completely under your control and that I would ignore the gods' orders in favor of yours .
Oh , forgive me !
Now I will have to send my humble proposal of peace to that young man .
You knew that my sword , weakened by my love for you , would obey that love no matter what .
Don't shed even one tear .
One of your tears is worth everything that was won and lost .
Give me a kiss .
This repays me .
Let the envoy from Antony come in .
Do you know him ?
Come forward and speak .
Humble as I am , I represent Antony .
Until recently , I was as unimportant to his affairs as the morning dew is to the wide ocean .
So be it .
Say what you're here for .
If that is not granted , he reduces his requests and asks only that he be allowed to live as a private man in Athens .
That's all he asks for himself .
Cleopatra recognizes your greatness and accepts your authority .
As for Antony , I'm not interested in his requests .
I'll give the Queen a hearing and grant her requests if she either throws her dishonored friend out of Egypt or kills him .
Then I'll listen to her .
Give my answer to them both .
May good luck follow you !
Take him safely through the lines .
I go , Caesar .
Observe how Antony takes his defeat and how his attitude influences his actions .
I will , Caesar .
What are we going to do , Enobarbus ?
Think about our situation , then die .
Who is to blame for this : Antony or I ?
Only Antony was at fault .
Why should he have followed you ?
With half the world opposing the other half , it wasn't the time for Antony , the pivotal player , to let love distract him .
To race after your departing ships , leaving his navy to watch , was a shame as great as the resulting loss .
Please , let's not talk about it .
Is that his answer ?
Yes , my lord .
The Queen will be treated fairly if she gives me up ?
That's what he says .
Tell her .
Your head , my lord ?
A messenger has arrived from Caesar .
With no more ceremony than that ?
See , ladies , how they scorn me now .
I'll be at your service .
He's waiting outside .
What's your message ?
Your wife , Fulvia , is dead .
Where did she die ?
In Sicyon .
In this letter you'll find details of her illness and other , more serious matters that concern you .
Leave me .
What does Caesar want ?
It is for your ears only .
There are only friends here .
Speak confidently .
So they are possibly Antony's friends .
Sir , he should have as many as Caesar has .
If Caesar chose , Antony would jump at the chance to be his friend .
As for us , you know we are Antony's , and he is Caesar's .
Just remember that he is Caesar .
He knows that you didn't embrace Antony because you loved him , but because you feared him .
Oh !
He is like a god and knows the truth .
My honor wasn't given ; it was only dominated .
Shall I tell Caesar what you request from him ?
He almost begs for the opportunity to help you .
It would please him very much if you would rely on his wealth and success to support you .
But he would feel even better if I could tell him that you had left Antony and put yourself under his protection .
What's your name ?
My name is Thidias .
Most kind messenger , tell great Caesar that through his deputy I kiss his conquering hand .
Tell him I am ready to lay my crown at his feet and kneel before him .
Promising favors ?
By Jove that thunders !
Who are you , slave ?
You will be whipped .
Take away this lout and whip him .
By the moon and stars !
Whip him !
If I saw twenty of the greatest powers that pay tribute to Caesar taking such liberties with her hand , what's her name now ?
Whip him , fellows , until he screws up his face like a baby and cries aloud for mercy !
Take him away .
Caesar's knave will bring him a message for us .
My good lord , You've always been a liar .
But when our vices become habits , Oh , the sadness of it ! , the wise gods blind us , shade our better judgment , make us love our mistakes , and laugh as we strut to our ruin .
Oh , has it come to this ?
You were a cold crumb on dead Julius Caesar's plate when I met you .
No , you were one of Gneius Pompey's leftovers , not to mention your other , more depraved affairs , which have somehow managed to avoid becoming the subject of vulgar gossip .
For I'm sure that although you may know what temperance is , you've never experienced it firsthand .
Why are you doing this ?
Soundly , my lord .
Did he cry ?
Did he beg my pardon ?
He did ask for mercy .
Are you done yet ?
You , my earthly moon , are now eclipsed , and that alone foretells my ruin .
In order to flatter Caesar , would you flirt with the servant who laces up his pants ?
Don't you know me still ?
Has your heart cooled toward me ?
Ah , dear , if that is true , let heaven make poisonous hail grow from my heart , and let the first hailstone drop down my throat .
As it dissolves , so shall my life .
The next hailstone should hit Caesarion , until one by one all my children , and every one of my brave Egyptians , are killed by the dissolving of this pellet storm and lie unburied , covered by gnats and flies .
I am satisfied .
I will fight him there .
Our land forces have bravely stood firm .
Our tattered navy has reassembled and set sail , as formidable as the sea itself .
Where have you been , my bravery ?
Do you hear what I say , lady ?
If I come back from the battlefield again to kiss those lips , I'll be covered in blood .
My sword and I will earn our place in history .
We still have hope .
That's my brave lord !
I'll fight brutally .
But now I'll grit my teeth and kill anyone who tries to stop me .
Come , let's have one more extravagant night .
Invite all my sad captains .
Let's drink through midnight .
It's my birthday .
I had planned to celebrate it quietly , but since my lord is once more himself , I will be Cleopatra again .
We'll win yet .
Do so .
I'll speak to them , and then tonight I'll get them all so drunk that the wine seeps out of their old war wounds .
Now he'll work himself up to a fury .
When courage consumes reason , it destroys its only weapon .
I'll look for some way to leave his service .
He calls me "boy" and scolds me as if he had the power to whip me out of Egypt .
Let the old ruffian discover that I have many other ways to die , and in the meantime , we'll laugh at his challenge .
Don't give him time to catch his breath .
Anger does not protect the angry well .
Tell our top commanders that I want tomorrow's battle to be the last we fight .
Our army has recently acquired many of Mark Antony's former soldiers , enough to capture him .
See that it is done , and prepare a feast for the soldiers .
We have enough supplies for it , and they've earned it .
Poor Antony !
What would you like , sir ?
I have to leave right away .
That will kill our lovers .
We know how much they suffer if we are unkind to them .
If we leave , it will feel like nothing less than death to them .
I must be gone .
If it's that important , then let the women die .
It would be a pity to throw them away for nothing , but if it's a matter of choosing between them and a great cause , then they're worthless .
If Cleopatra hears even a breath of this , she'll die immediately .
I've seen her claim to be dying twenty times before , and for far less reason .
I think there must be something invigorating about death , since she dies with such enthusiasm .
She's more cunning than anyone can imagine .
Her sighs and tears are like great winds and floods .
He won't fight with me , Domitius ?
No .
Why won't he ?
He thinks that since his fortune is twenty times better than yours , it would be like pitting twenty men against one .
Tomorrow , soldier , I'll fight by sea and land .
By the end I will either live , or else I'll restore my honor by shedding my blood .
Will you fight well ?
When I strike , I'll cry , "All or nothing ! " Well put .
Come on .
Call out my household servants .
Tonight let's have plenty to eat .
You have all served me well , and kings are your peers .
The gods forbid !
Well , my good fellows , wait on me tonight .
Keep my cups full and treat me as you did when my empire was one of your fellow servants , obeying my commands .
Look , they're crying .
Ha , ha , ha !
May the evil one take me if I meant it like that !
Those tears will bring blessings to you .
You interpret my words in a melancholy sense , my hearty friends .
You should know , my friends , that I have good hopes for tomorrow , and that I will lead you as if I expect victory rather than an honorable death .
Good night , brother .
Tomorrow is the day .
Have you heard about anything unusual happening in the city ?
No .
What was it ?
It was probably just a rumor .
Good night .
Well sir , good night .
Soldiers , watch carefully .
You too .
This is our station .
And if our navy wins tomorrow , no doubt our army will do their part .
It's an outstanding army and highly motivated .
Quiet !
What's that sound ?
Listen !
There's music coming out of thin air .
From under the earth .
It's a lucky sign , isn't it ?
No .
Quiet , I say .
What does this mean ?
Hello there , good sirs .
Yes .
Isn't it strange ?
Do you hear that , men ?
Do you ?
Let's follow the music as far as we can without leaving our station and see if it stops .
Good idea .
It's very strange .
Get a little sleep .
Come on , good fellow , help me into that armor you're carrying .
If luck deserts us today , it's because we defy it .
Come on .
No , I'll help too .
What's this part for ?
Ah , leave it alone .
You armor my heart .
No !
No !
Really , I'll help .
It must go like this .
We've got it now. , Do you see this , my good fellow ?
Go and put on your own armor .
In a minute , sir .
Didn't I buckle this well ?
Excellently , excellently .
Hurry. , Oh , love , if you could only watch the battle today and see how expert I am at my craft .
Good morning to you .
Welcome .
You look like a person who knows the business of war .
When we love our job we get up early and go to it joyfully .
Even though it's early , there are already a thousand armored soldiers waiting for you at the harbor .
The weather is fair .
Good morning , General .
Good morning , General .
That was a fine fanfare , boys .
Like a young man who wants to amount to something , this morning begins early .
Farewell , lady .
Whatever happens to me , this is a soldier's kiss .
I'll leave you without revealing any emotion , like a man of steel .
Lead the way .
He goes forth to war bravely .
May the gods bless Antony today !
I wish you and your scarred self had convinced me to wage our last battle on land .
If you had , the kings that have revolted and the soldier that deserted this morning would still be behind you .
Who deserted this morning ?
You don't know ?
Someone who was always near you .
Sir , he's with Caesar .
Sir , he left his belongings and treasure .
He's gone ?
It's certain .
Eros , send his treasure to him .
Do it now .
Don't keep anything back , I insist .
Write to him from me , I'll sign it , sending greetings and gentle good-byes .
Say that I hope he never has cause to look for a new master .
Oh , my bad luck has forced honest men to become traitors .
Hurry .
Fulvia is dead .
Pardon me ?
Fulvia is dead .
Fulvia ?
Dead .
Then you should offer the gods a sacrifice to show your thanks .
If Fulvia were the last woman on earth , there would be a reason to grieve .
But in this way , grief and comfort appear together .
The only kind of tears you should shed in this case are the kind you might get from holding an onion to your nose .
I must go and continue the business Fulvia started .
The business you began here needs you as well , especially the business with Cleopatra , which only you can attend to .
Enough of this frivolous talk .
Give our officers notice of our intentions .
I'll tell the Queen the reason for our quick departure and get her permission to leave .
Fulvia's death and the pressing concerns related to it are not the only reasons I am eager to go ; friends in Rome have also sent many letters advising my return .
The empire may be in danger if he's not restrained before he reaches his full potential .
There are many troubles brewing now that have yet to become full-fledged threats .
Agrippa , go start the battle .
We want Antony taken alive .
Make sure everyone knows that .
I will , Caesar .
An era of universal peace is about to start .
That way Antony will feel like he's fighting his own men .
Caesar hanged him for this service .
Canidius and the others that left Antony are given hospitality here but no positions of trust .
I've done a bad thing , for which I will blame myself so much that I'll never be happy again .
Enobarbus , Antony has sent you all your treasure , with generous gifts besides .
The messenger arrived on my watch and is unloading his mules at your tent .
It's yours .
Don't joke about this , Enobarbus .
I'm telling you the truth .
You'd better bring the messenger safely through the lines so he can return .
I'd do it myself , but I can't leave my post .
Your Emperor is still a king among gods .
I am the worst person alive , and I know it the best .
Oh , Antony , you extravagantly generous man , how would you have rewarded me for serving you faithfully when you reward my badness with all of this gold !
My heart feels like it's about to explode .
If grief doesn't kill me , I'll find a quicker way to kill myself , even though I think grief will do the job just as well .
I , fight against you , Antony ?
No , I'll go find some ditch to die in .
The foulest fate would be most appropriate for me now in this latest phase of my life .
Retreat !
We've advanced too far .
Caesar himself is in trouble and there are more adversaries than we expected .
Oh , my brave Emperor , this is what I call a fight !
If we'd fought like this before , we'd have driven them home with bandaged heads .
You're bleeding a lot .
I had a scar here that looked like a "T" ; now it's an "H." They're retreating .
We'll chase 'em into their latrines .
I still have room for six more wounds .
They're retreating , sir , and our superiority indicates a clear victory .
Let's slash their backs and grab 'em like we do rabbits , from behind .
It's fair game to mark a coward .
I'll reward you once for your cheerfulness and ten times for your courage .
Come on .
I'll limp after you .
We've driven him all the way back to his camp .
One of you run to the Queen with the news .
Before sunrise tomorrow , we'll kill anyone who escaped today .
You are all Lord of lords !
Have you returned smiling from the great battle for the world ?
My songbird , we have beaten them to their beds .
What do you think , girl !
Look at this man .
Today he fought as though he were a god who hated mankind .
He deserves it , even if it were covered with jewels like holy
If we aren't relieved in an hour , we have to return to our barracks .
Oh , listen to me , night , Who is this ?
Stay hidden and listen .
Be my witness , oh you blessed moon .
That's Enobarbus ?
Quiet !
Keep listening .
My heart , which dried out with grief , will surely break apart into a powder , and that will be the end of my disgusting mind .
Oh , Antony !
Let's speak to him .
Let's listen to him .
Good idea .
But he's sleeping .
No one ever gave a prayer like that before going to sleep .
Let's go to him .
Wake up , sir , wake up .
Speak to us .
Do you hear us , sir ?
The hand of death has taken him .
Let's carry him to the barracks .
He's an important person .
Our hour is up .
Come on , then .
He may recover yet .
I will .
They've switched their operation to the sea today .
We didn't please them on land .
We're ready for both , my lord .
I wish they'd fight in fire or in the air .
But here's the plan : our army will stay with us on the hills by the city .
Let's take up the best positions we can in the valleys .
They still haven't joined the battle .
I'll be able to see better from that pine tree over there .
I'll let you know right away how it's going .
Swallows have built nests in Cleopatra's sails .
All is lost !
This treacherous Egyptian has betrayed me .
Three-time traitor and whore !
Tell the army to flee .
Order them to escape .
Go !
Oh , sun , I will never see another one of your sunrises .
Luck and Antony separate here and now .
Here we'll shake hands good-bye .
Is it all come to this ?
I've been stripped of everything , betrayed .
Oh , that devious Egyptian spirit !
Ah , you sorceress !
Be gone !
Why is my lord enraged against his love ?
Get out of my sight , or I'll give you what you deserve and spoil Caesar's victory .
Let him hoist you up in front of the shouting crowds !
Follow his chariot , like the greatest disgrace to your whole gender .
Then let Octavia dig up your face with her nails .
She'll die for it. , Eros , ho !
Help me , ladies !
Go to your tomb !
Lock yourself in and send him word that you're dead .
When a great person departs , it causes more pain than when the soul leaves the body .
Say the last word I spoke was "Antony , " and please word it pathetically .
Go , Mardian , and let me know how he reacts to my death .
Eros , can you still see me ?
Yes , noble lord .
You've seen these illusions .
Yes , my lord .
What looks like a horse is quick as thought disfigured by the wind , made as difficult to distinguish as water poured into water .
That's true , my lord .
Eros , my young friend , your captain is now just like that cloud .
Here and now I seem like Antony , but I can't keep myself in this form , my boy .
No , don't cry , kind Eros .
Oh , your contemptible lady !
She has disarmed me .
Get out , insolent eunuch !
Silence !
She has betrayed me and shall die .
A person can only pay with their life once , and she has paid in full .
What you wanted is yours .
Most noble Antony ! " Then , as she was speaking your name , a strangled groan split her words .
Antony" was divided between her heart and lips .
She gave up her life with your name still within her .
Is she dead , then ?
Dead .
Remove your armor , Eros .
Off !
Take off my armor .
Oh , chest , obey me !
Heart , for once be stronger than all the rest of the body combined .
Faster , Eros , faster .
I won't be a soldier anymore .
Battered armor , be off .
You were worn with honor .
I will catch up with you , Cleopatra , and weep for your forgiveness .
Since the light of my life has gone out , I'll stop here .
Now any effort ruins what it attempts .
Yes , even power gets in its own way .
End it , then , and everything is over. , Eros ! , I'm coming , my Queen ! , Eros ! , Wait for me .
In the place where souls recline on beds of flowers we'll walk hand in hand and amaze the other ghosts with our spirited demeanor .
Eros !
What can I do for my lord ?
Since Cleopatra died , I have lived in such dishonor that the gods despise my disgrace .
Do it .
This is that time .
You won't be striking me down , but defeating Caesar .
Call up your courage .
The gods forbid !
Can I do what all the Parthian arrows , though shot by enemies , could not ?
Eros , would you like to look through a window in Rome and watch your master marching in Caesar's victory parade , his arms crossed and tied , his head bowed in submission , his face red from shame , while the chariot of triumphant Caesar precedes him , putting the final stamp to his humiliation ?
I would not .
Draw your trustworthy sword , which you have used in such service to your country .
Oh , sir , pardon me !
When I freed you from slavery , didn't you swear to do this when I asked you ?
Do it immediately , or all your previous services to me were accidental , without purpose .
Take out your sword and come on .
Then turn your noble face away from me , that face that the whole world adores .
Look !
Where is he ?
I haven't seen him recently .
What should I do that I'm not doing ?
Always give him his way .
Never contradict him .
Don't push him too far .
I wish you'd be patient .
We come to hate that which controls us .
But here comes Antony .
I am sick and sullen .
I'm sorry to have to say this , Help me away from here , dear Charmian !
I shall faint .
I have drawn my sword .
My dear master , my captain , my sovereign , let me say before I strike this fatal blow : farewell .
You've said it , friend , and farewell to you .
Good-bye , great commander .
Should I do it now ?
Now , Eros .
Well , then , there !
With this I avoid the grief of Antony's death .
My Queen and Eros have by their brave examples beaten me to the history books .
I learned to do this from you .
What !
I'm not dead ?
Oh , kill me !
What's the trouble ?
I've botched the job , friends .
Oh , finish what I've begun .
Our guiding light is out .
And time itself is ended .
Sadness and despair !
Whoever's a real friend should strike me dead .
Not me .
Me neither .
None of us .
Your death and destiny advise your followers to escape .
I only need to show your sword to Caesar and tell him about your death to get into his good favor .
Where's Antony ?
There , Diomedes , there .
Is he still alive ?
Why don't you answer me , man ?
Is that you , Diomedes ?
Draw your sword and give me enough blows to kill me .
Most powerful lord , my mistress Cleopatra sent me to you .
When did she send you ?
Just now , my lord .
Where is she ?
Locked in her tomb .
She had a premonition of what has actually happened .
Afraid that your anger would not subside , she sent you word she was dead .
Too late , good Diomedes .
Call my guard , please .
Hey out there !
Carry me , good friends , to where Cleopatra is .
It's the last command I shall ever give you .
We're very sorry , sir , that you may not live to wear us out with your commands .
It's a very sad day .
No , my friends , don't please fate by giving it your sorrow as well .
If we welcome our punishment , we punish it right back by seeming to take it lightly .
Pick me up .
I have often led you , now you must carry me , my good friends , and take my thanks for everything .
Oh , Charmian , I will never leave this tomb !
Be calm , dear lady .
No , I won't .
Strange and terrible events are all welcome , but I despise comforts .
The size of my sorrow must be as great as its source .
What's the news !
Is he dead ?
He is close to death , but not dead yet .
Oh , Antony , Antony , Antony !
Help , Charmian , help , Iras , help !
Be calm !
It was not Caesar's bravery that conquered Antony but Antony's that has triumphed over himself .
That's the way it should be , only Antony should conquer Antony .
No , our general's infatuation is out of control .
His eyes used to glow with pride when he reviewed his troops .
His heart used to burst the buckles on his breastplate in great fights , but now he's lost all temperance and dedicates his heart to satisfying the lust of an Egyptian whore .
Look at them .
Take a good look , and you'll see that one of the three men who rule the world has turned into a whore's jester .
Look and see .
If what you feel is really love , tell me how much .
It would be a pretty stingy love if it could be counted and calculated .
I want to measure the extent of your love , to see how far it stretches .
Then you would have to go beyond heaven , beyond earth .
I have news from Rome , my good lord .
I am dying , Cleopatra , dying .
I just beg death to wait awhile , until I place the last of our many thousands of kisses on your lips .
I don't dare come down , forgive me , my lord , I don't dare , for fear of capture .
I will never be exhibited as lucky Caesar's prize .
If knives , poison , or snakes have edge , effect , or venom , I am safe from that fate .
Your wife Octavia , with her self-effacing eyes and self-righteous assumptions , won't get any praise from patronizing me .
Help us , good friends .
Oh , quick , before I'm gone .
Such exercise !
My lord is so heavy !
If I had the goddess Juno's power , I would make the strong-winged messenger , Mercury , pick you up and seat you beside Jove .
And welcome , welcome !
Die where you have lived , in my arms .
If my lips had the power to give life , I would wear them out like this .
What a sad sight !
I am dying , Cleopatra , dying .
Give me some wine and let me say a few words .
I'll trust my determination and my hands , but none of Caesar's men .
Now I feel my soul leaving .
I can't speak any more .
Most noble man , will you die ?
Don't you care about me ?
Shall I stay in this dreary world , which is no better than a pigsty without you ?
My lord !
Oh , the glory of war has faded .
The flags have fallen .
Young boys and girls are equal to men .
There is nothing distinctive , nothing remarkable left in the world .
Our Queen is dead too .
Lady !
Madam !
Oh , madam , madam , madam !
Royal Egypt , Empress !
Quiet , quiet , Iras .
Now I am no more than a woman , ruled by the same lowly passion as the maid who milks and does the humblest chores .
Now all is for nothing .
How are you , my ladies ?
Cheer up !
How are you , Charmian ?
My gallant girls !
Good noble ladies , be brave .
We'll bury him , and then we'll commit acts as brave and fine as any Romans , and make death proud to take us .
Come on , you can go .
The container of that great soul is now cold .
Ah , ladies , ladies !
Let's go .
We have no friends but determination and the quickest death .
Tell him to surrender .
His position is hopeless .
Right away , Caesar .
What are you doing with a sword ?
Who do you think you are coming in here armed ?
My name is Decretus .
I served Mark Antony , who was the commander most worthy of my services .
While he was alive , I lived only to serve him and oppose his enemies .
If not , you can kill me .
What are you saying ?
Caesar , I'm telling you that Antony is dead .
When such a great man dies there should be a thunderclap .
The fractured world , in its confusion , should send lions into the city streets and humans into the wilderness to live in lions' dens .
This isn't the death of one man .
It's the death of half the world .
Now , my dearest Queen , Please , stand farther away from me .
What's the matter ?
I can see in your eyes there's been some good news .
What , does your wife say you can come home ?
I wish she'd never let you come .
Don't let her say I kept you .
I have no power over you .
You belong to her .
The gods know , Oh , never has a queen been so betrayed as I have been .
I knew from the first it would be this way .
Cleopatra , How could I have ever thought that you would be faithful and true , even though your vows of love shook the heavens themselves , you , who were unfaithful to Fulvia ?
It was wild insanity to believe promises made by the mouth and not the heart .
When you begged to stay , that was the time for words .
You didn't want to go then !
You saw eternity in my lips and eyes , and happiness in the arch of my eyebrows .
My features are still that beautiful , or else you , the greatest soldier in the world , have become the greatest liar by overpraising them .
This is his sword .
I pulled it from his wound .
Look , his noble blood is still on it .
Listen , sad friends , though the gods may rebuke me , this news would make kings cry .
His faults were equally matched by his virtues .
But gods , you give us faults so we'll be human .
Caesar is upset .
Either I had to ruin you , or you would have ruined me .
Let me tell you , friends ,
I'll tell you at a better time .
This man looks like his business is urgent .
Let's hear what he has to say .
Tell her to put her mind at rest .
She'll find out soon enough by one of our messengers how respectfully and kindly we plan to treat her .
May the gods bless you .
Come here , Proculeius .
Tell her we mean her no disrespect .
Go , and hurry back to bring us her reply and news of her state of mind .
I will , Caesar .
Gallus , you go with him .
Where's Dolabella ?
Dolabella !
I remember he's already occupied .
He'll be done in time .
Come and see the proof .
It's pathetic to be Caesar .
He can't be Fortune ; he's only Fortune's errand boy .
Caesar greets the Queen of Egypt and asks that you consider what you will ask from him .
What's your name ?
My name is Proculeius .
But I don't worry about being deceived because I don't need to trust .
If your master wants a queen to beg from him , you should tell him that a queen will beg for no less than a kingdom .
If he will grant me conquered Egypt , so that I may give it to my son , I will kneel to him with thanks .
Be content .
You're in the charge of an honorable man .
Don't be afraid .
If I can tell him that you have submitted to him sweetly , he'll request your assistance in finding ways in which he can support you .
Please tell him I have surrendered to his fortune .
I'm learning every hour how to be subservient .
I'll tell him all of this , dear lady .
Be at ease .
Your majesty !
Oh , Cleopatra !
Stop , brave lady , stop !
We have not betrayed you .
What , am I being denied death , as well ?
Don't insult my master's generosity by killing yourself .
Your death would prevent that .
Where are you , Death ?
Come here .
Come , and you can have a queen .
Oh , control yourself , lady !
Let Caesar do whatever he wants .
You'd better understand that I won't wait till I'm chained up in your master's court , and I won't let myself be scolded even once by dull Octavia .
Shall I let them exhibit me to the shouting mobs of Rome ?
I'd rather die in a ditch in Egypt , and make it my gentle grave .
I'd rather lie in the Nile mud with flies laying their eggs in me , making me disgusting .
I'd rather be hung in chains from one of our pyramids !
You'll see that Caesar is giving you no reason to do so .
Proculeius , Caesar has heard about what you've done here and has sent for you .
I'll take the Queen into my custody .
So be it , Dolabella .
Be kind to her .
Have you heard of me , most noble Empress ?
I don't remember .
You must be the one who laughs when boys or women tell you their dreams .
Isn't that your habit ?
I don't know what you mean , madam .
I dreamed about an emperor called Antony .
Oh , I wish I could sleep again , so I could have another dream like that !
When he raised his arm in command , the world trembled .
There was no end to his generosity .
Kings and noblemen served him .
Kingdoms and provinces dropped from his pockets like loose change .
Cleopatra , Do you think there ever was , or could there ever be , a man such as the one I dreamed about ?
No , gentle madam .
The gods can hear you lying !
Antony would easily outshine all imaginary beings .
Listen to me , madam .
You are a remarkable person and your loss is equally remarkable .
I hope I never achieve success if I don't feel some of your heartbroken grief right now .
Thank you , sir .
Do you know what Caesar intends to do with me ?
I'm reluctant to tell you what I wish you knew .
You need not kneel to me .
Please rise , Queen .
The gods have ordained it to be like this , sir .
Don't think I blame you .
I'll leave you now .
You may do whatever you want in the world .
It's yours , and you may hang us , your trophies of war , anywhere you like .
Here , my good lord .
What do you mean , lady ?
I wish I were as big and strong as you .
Listen to me , Queen .
There is an emergency I must take care of , but my whole heart will remain here with you .
My Italy is full of civil war .
Sextus Pompeius is sailing toward the port of Rome .
But my personal motivation , and that which should move you most to sanction my departure , is that Fulvia is dead .
Is it possible Fulvia is dead ?
She's dead , my Queen .
You shall advise me in everything having to do with Cleopatra .
This is the inventory of the money , silverware , dishes , and jewels that are still in my possession .
Not even trivial things were left out .
Where's Seleucus ?
Here , madam .
This is my treasurer .
My lord , he will swear on his life that I haven't kept a thing. , Tell the truth , Seleucus .
Madam , I'd rather sew my lips shut than tell a lie when my life depends upon it .
What did I keep for myself ?
Enough to buy everything you have declared .
No , don't be ashamed , Cleopatra .
Look around you , Caesar .
Oh , just see what happens after the pageantry is over !
Seleucus' ingratitude makes me wild .
I'll give you a good reason to cringe , I promise you .
I'll scratch out your eyes , even if they could fly .
Oh , that was unbelievably low !
Cleopatra , our conquest won't include either the things you kept back or the ones you listed .
It's all still yours .
Do whatever you like with it .
So cheer up .
No , dear Queen .
Eat and sleep .
I have so much care and pity for you that you could call me friend .
And so , good-bye .
My master and my lord !
Not true .
Good-bye .
But listen , Charmian .
It's time to end it , good lady .
I will , madam .
Where's the Queen ?
Look , sir .
Dolabella .
Make the best use of this information you can .
I have done your bidding and fulfilled my promise .
Dolabella , I will always be in debt to you .
And I your servant .
Good-bye , good Queen .
I must go attend Caesar .
Farewell , and thanks .
Now , Iras , what do you think ?
You will be exhibited in Rome along with me , like Egyptian puppets .
Crude slaves with greasy aprons , rulers , and hammers shall lift us up so everyone can see .
The gods forbid !
No , it's certain , Iras .
Insolent Oh , the good gods !
No , that's the truth .
I'll never see it .
I know my nails are stronger than my eyes ; I'll scratch them out .
Why , that's just the way to frustrate their plans and defeat their absurd intentions .
Now , Charmian !
Women , dress me like a queen .
Go get my best clothes .
What's that noise ?
There's a farmer here who won't leave without seeing your Highness .
He has brought you figs .
Let him come in .
What a poor instrument , that can do such a noble deed !
He brings me freedom .
There's nothing of the weak woman left in me .
Now from head to foot I'm as firm as marble .
Now the inconstant moon has nothing to do with me .
This is the man .
Leave us .
Do you have in there the pretty snake of the Nile that kills without pain ?
I certainly do have him , but I wouldn't advise you to touch him .
People who die of it seldom or never recover .
Do you remember anyone who died of it ?
Many people , men and women alike .
Indeed , she gives a very good testimony of the snake's power .
But if you believe everything they say , you won't be saved by half of what they do .
But this is a sure thing : the snake's an odd snake .
I hope you are pleased with the snake .
Farewell .
You must know that the snake will act according to his nature .
Yes , yes .
Farewell .
There isn't any kindness in the snake .
Good .
Will it eat me ?
Don't think I'm so dumb that I don't know that the devil himself won't eat a woman .
Well , you can go now .
Farewell .
Give me my robe .
Put on my crown .
I long to be immortal .
Quickly , quickly , good Iras , quickly .
I think I hear Antony call me .
I see him revive himself to praise my noble act .
I hear him mock Caesar's luck , which the gods give to men in order to balance out their subsequent wrath .
Now let my courage prove my title as wife .
So , are you done ?
Come then , kiss me and take the last bit of warmth from my lips .
Good-bye , kind Charmian .
Iras , I won't see you again for a long time .
Do I have the asp's poison on my lips ?
Did you fall ?
If you can leave your body so easily , then the touch of death is like a lover's pinch , which hurts but is desired .
Do you lie still ?
If you leave like that , you tell the world that it's not worthy of a good-bye .
Clouds , dissolve into rain , so that I could say the gods themselves are weeping !
Separate me from life with your sharp teeth .
Poor poisonous fool , be angry and bite .
Oh , if you could speak , I might hear you call Caesar an ass who's been outsmarted !
Oh , eastern star !
Quiet , quiet !
Don't you see my baby suckling at my breast so that its nurse will fall asleep ?
The poison is as sweet as balm , as soft as air , as gentle , Oh , Antony ! , No , I'll take you too .
Why should I stay , In this vile world ?
So , good-bye .
Now , Death , you can boast that you have an incomparable girl in your possession .
Close , soft eyes .
The sun will never be seen by such royal eyes again .
Your crown is crooked .
I'll straighten it , then play , Where's the Queen ?
Speak softly .
Don't wake her .
Caesar has sent , Too slow a messenger .
Oh , come quickly !
I almost feel you .
There's Dolabella , who was sent from Caesar .
Call him .
What kind of work is this , Charmian ?
Is this well done ?
It is well done , and appropriate for a princess who has descended from so many royal kings .
Ah , soldier !
What's going on in here ?
They're all dead .
Caesar , you thought this would happen .
You're coming here yourself to see the dreaded act you had tried to stop .
Oh , unfaithful lover !
Stop arguing and listen to my plans .
Whether I go ahead with them or not is completely up to you .
I swear by the sun that when I leave here , it will be as your faithful servant .
Cut my corset laces , Charmian , so I can breathe .
Hurry !
Just as Antony loves .
Control yourself , my precious Queen , and concede that my love is true .
That's what Fulvia told me .
I beg you , turn away and cry for her .
Then say good-bye to me and tell me those tears were for my benefit .
Oh , sir , you are too good at predicting the future .
What you were afraid of has happened .
How did they die ?
I don't see any blood .
Who was with them last ?
A simple country farmer who brought her figs .
This was the basket .
They were poisoned , then .
Oh , Caesar , this Charmian lived until a moment ago .
She stood and spoke .
I found her adjusting the crown on her dead mistress .
She stood trembling , then suddenly dropped dead .
Oh , noble weakness !
Here on her breast there's a little bloody mark .
There's a similar mark on her arm .
This is an asp's trail , and these fig leaves have slime on them , just like the kind that asps deposit on the caves by the Nile .
Pick up her bed and carry her ladies out of the tomb .
She shall be buried next to her Antony .
No other grave on earth shall hold a pair this famous .
Our army shall somberly attend this funeral and then depart for Rome .
Come , Dolabella .
You'll make me angry .
No more of this .
I know you can do better than that , but it'll do for now .
I swear by my sword , Swear by your shield , too !
I'll leave you , lady .
Polite sir , let me say one thing .
Sir , you and I must part company , no , that's not it .
It's difficult to have such immaturity so close to my heart , but bear with me .
Even the traits that become me most kill me when you don't approve of them .
Your honor is the reason you are leaving .
May the gods be with you .
May your sword be victorious and everything you do succeed .
Let's go .
Come with me .
Our imminent separation so occupies our thoughts that even though you stay here , you come with me , and even though I leave here , I stay with you .
You're too forgiving .
Even if we said that this behavior suits him , though only a man with a perfect character could avoid being disgraced by such antics , there's no excuse for the extra work we've had to take on while he's been off amusing himself .
If he's been spending his leisure time in lustful pursuits , then he'll be punished with venereal diseases , and that's his business .
Here's more news .
Pompey has a strong navy .
I should have known it .
It's been this way ever since the first government was organized .
Caesar , I have news about Menecrates and Menas , notorious pirates who prowl the sea in a variety of ships .
They've made many raids upon Italy , and the naval patrols go pale at even the thought of resisting them .
Antony , it's time to stop your wild hedonism .
And even though you were brought up as a gentleman , you patiently tolerated more hardships than savages could withstand .
You drank horses' urine and water from scum-covered puddles that even animals would refuse .
It's too bad .
Let's hope his sense of shame will send him back to Rome quickly .
It's time that we brought our armies into the field .
Pompey is making the most of our absence .
Tomorrow , Caesar , I'll be able to tell you what land and sea forces I can raise for this war .
I'll be getting my own figures together in the meantime .
Good-bye .
Good-bye , my lord .
Charmian !
Madam ?
So I can sleep away the time while my Antony is gone .
You think about him too much .
That's treason !
I hope not , Madam .
What can I do for your highness ?
I don't want to hear you sing .
I'm not interested in anything a eunuch can do .
It's a good thing for you that , being castrated , you can better concentrate on my needs .
Do you have desires ?
Yes , dear madam .
Indeed ?
Well , not in deed , madam , since I can't do anything unchaste .
Is he standing or sitting ?
Or is he walking ?
Or is he on his horse ?
Oh , how fortunate that horse is to have Antony on him .
He's speaking now , or perhaps he's whispering , "Where's my serpent of the Nile ? " For that's his pet name for me .
I'm killing myself with this provocative speculation.. .
Are you thinking about me ?
No , listen to it , Antony .
Perhaps What , my love ?
Maybe ?
No , most likely .
You can't stay here any longer .
Call in the messengers and we'll find out .
As surely as I am the queen of Egypt , Antony , you're blushing , which means you're Caesar's servant .
Call the messengers !
Queen of Egypt , greetings !
You are nothing like Mark Antony !
But since you come from him , you're saturated with his healing spirit .
How does it go with my magnificent Mark Antony ?
The last thing he did before sending me off , dear Queen , was to kiss , the last of many such kisses , this Indian pearl for you .
My ear must pull it out .
Good friend , " he said , "say that the faithful Roman sends an oyster's treasure to the great Queen of Egypt , and that he plans to enhance this meager gift by adding new kingdoms to her empire .
Tell her that the entire East shall call her Queen." Then he nodded and solemnly mounted an armored warhorse , which neighed so loudly it effectively silenced anything I might have said in reply .
Was he sad or happy ?
He was like that time of year halfway between the extremes of hot and cold : he was neither sad nor happy .
Just notice .
He wasn't sad , because he knows that his disposition affects others .
He was somewhere in the middle , between them.. .
Oh , heavenly mixture !
Whether you are sad or merry , the intensity of either suits you like no one else.. .
Yes , madam , twenty different messengers .
Why did you send so many ?
Whoever is born on a day I forget to send a message to Antony will die a beggar .
Bring ink and paper , Charmian .
Welcome , my good Alexas .
Charmian , did I ever love Caesar as much as this ?
Oh , that splendid Caesar !
May you choke on any other sentiments like that !
Say , "That splendid Antony." The courageous Caesar !
By Isis , I'll give you bloody teeth if you ever compare Caesar with Antony , my best man among men .
Pardon me , but I'm just repeating what you yourself have said .
That was when I was young and inexperienced and didn't know what passion was .
In that case , the wise gods deny our prayers for our own good .
I'll do well .
The people are on my side , and I'm in charge of the sea .
My forces are growing , and everything I know tells me it's all coming together .
Mark Antony is at dinner in Egypt and won't be going outside to make war .
Caesar loses supporters wherever he raises money .
Lepidus flatters both of them , as they flatter him , but he doesn't love them , and they don't love him .
Caesar and Lepidus are organizing their military operation .
They have a massive army .
Where did you hear this ?
It's not true .
From Silvius , sir .
He's dreaming .
I know they're in Rome together , hoping for Antony to return .
Lecherous Cleopatra , may all the charms of love soften those withered lips !
Join your witchcraft with your beauty , and let Antony's lust combine with both .
Keep this libertine occupied with endless debauchery .
This news is absolutely true : Mark Antony is expected to arrive in Rome at any hour now .
In the time since he left Egypt , he could have traveled an even longer distance .
His military ability is double that of the other two .
We must form a better opinion of ourselves if our uprising can pull the insatiable Antony's attention away from that Egyptian widow .
I don't expect Caesar and Antony will have a very friendly reunion .
Menas , I don't understand how minor quarrels can be superseded by greater ones .
It will be as the gods see fit .
In any case , our survival depends on putting together the strongest force possible .
Let's go , Menas .
Good Enobarbus , you would be doing a very good thing if you advised your captain to speak calmly and quietly .
I will advise him to speak as he usually does .
By Jupiter , if I were Antony , I wouldn't shave my beard today .
This is not the time for dwelling on personal grievances .
But major issues must come before minor ones .
Not if the minor ones come up first .
Here comes the noble Antony .
And there comes Caesar .
You're right .
If we were in front of our armies , about to fight , I would do this .
Welcome to Rome .
Thank you .
Have a seat .
After you .
No , after you .
I should be ridiculed if I were offended so easily , and laughed at even more for speaking of you disrespectfully , when I had no reason to speak of you at all .
Caesar , what did my stay in Egypt have to do with you ?
No more than my staying here in Rome might mean to you in Egypt .
But if you conspired against my position while you were there , I might be interested in the reason for your stay in Egypt .
How do you mean , "conspired" ?
You can judge for yourself what I mean .
Your wife and brother led troops against me , claiming to be fighting in your name .
They said they were acting for you .
You're mistaken .
My brother didn't use my name to justify his rebellion .
He rejected my authority as much as yours .
I've already sent the proof in my letters .
If you want to pick a fight , you'll have to find a more substantial excuse .
You defend yourself by blaming my judgment , but you're just making up feeble excuses .
Not true , not true .
You know I would never approve a war against my own cause .
As for my wife , if only you had such a wife .
It's easier to rule a third of the world than a wife like that .
But you can't blame me for her offenses .
I sent you a letter while you were carousing in Alexandria .
I was not myself , as a result of the wine .
The next day I explained all this to him , which was as good as begging his pardon .
Let's not fight over this fellow .
Meet with the ambassadors .
Tonight we'll wander through the streets and observe the people .
You will never be able to say the same about me .
Go on , Caesar .
What part of the agreement did I break ?
You agreed to send me troops and weapons when I needed them .
You refused me both .
I overlooked your request , but I did not deny it .
Your request came at a time when the poisonous effects of reveling caused me to be unaware of my own actions .
Spoken like a gentleman .
If it's okay with you , you should not press your grievances any further , but realize that the current situation should be enough to reconcile you .
Well put , Maecenas .
Or you can pretend to settle your differences until this matter with Pompey is finished .
You can argue as much as you like when there's nothing else to do .
You are only a soldier .
Don't speak any further .
As you please .
May I speak , Caesar .
What is it , Agrippa ?
You have a beautiful half-sister , Octavia .
Great Mark Antony is a widower now .
You'd better not make that suggestion , Agrippa .
If Cleopatra heard you , you would be well punished for your audacity .
It's true I'm not married , Caesar .
Let me hear what Agrippa has to say .
With this marriage , all the petty jealousies that now seem huge , and all the great fears that are dangerous in themselves , would disappear .
Since she would love both of you , you two would be joined in that love .
What do you say , Caesar ?
He has both my power and my influence over Octavia .
I wouldn't dream of opposing such an obviously promising idea .
Here's my hand .
I give you a sister whom I love more than a brother ever loved any sister .
She will be the bond that joins our kingdoms and our hearts .
I'm happy to say "amen" to that !
I didn't think I would ever fight Pompey .
There isn't much time .
Either we go after Pompey or he'll come after us .
Where is he now ?
Near How large is his land army ?
Large and increasing .
But his navy rules the sea .
That's what I hear .
Come with us , Lepidus .
Noble Antony , even illness couldn't keep me away .
Good Enobarbus !
We can be happy that things have been resolved so agreeably .
And I see you survived your time in Egypt .
We heard that once you were served eight wild boars roasted whole for breakfast , for only twelve people !
Is that true ?
That was nothing .
There were many even more memorable feasts .
She's a remarkable lady , if the rumors are to be believed .
I'll tell you .
The sails were dyed purple , and they were perfumed so heavily that they made the air seem dizzy with love .
The oars were made of silver , and the oarsmen rowed in time to flute music .
Pretty , Cupid-like boys stood on either side of her , smiling and cooling her with multicolored fans , which seemed to fan the flames in her cheeks even as they cooled them , undoing what they did .
How excellent for Antony !
When she landed at the port , Antony sent an invitation for her to come to supper .
She replied by saying that it would be better for him to be her guest instead .
Royal seductress !
Now Antony has to leave her completely .
Age won't wither her , and her charms are so varied that she never grows boring .
Even her worst faults are charming , and holy priests bless her even when she acts the slut .
Let's go .
Good Enobarbus , consider yourself my guest as long as you're here .
I humbly thank you .
And I will spend our time apart on my knees , praying for you .
Good night .
Tell me why , if you can .
But you had better get back to Egypt again .
Tell me who shall have the better luck , Caesar or me ?
Caesar .
So you'd better not stay with him , Antony .
Your guardian angel is noble , courageous , significant , and unmatched when Caesar's not around .
But when you are with him , your angel is weakened and easily frightened .
That's why there must be space between you .
Have a good night !
Don't speak of this again .
To none but you , only to you .
With his natural luck , he will beat you even against the odds .
Your light dulls when he is near .
Leave now .
Tell Ventidius I want to speak with him .
Come here , Ventidius .
You must go to Parthia .
Your authorization is ready .
Come with me and I'll get it for you .
Don't spend any more time here .
Go tell your generals to hurry their preparations .
Sir , we'll follow as soon as Mark Antony kisses Octavia good-bye .
Good-bye then , until the time I see you dressed in your battle gear , which will suit you both very well .
You're taking a shorter route .
My plans take me a roundabout way .
You'll get there two days before me .
Good luck , sir .
Farewell .
Play me some music .
Music feeds the melancholy moods of us lovers .
Musicians , come in !
Never mind .
Let's play billiards .
Play with me , Charmian .
My arm is sore .
I'll do my best , madam .
I don't want to play now .
Give me my fishing rod .
We'll go to the river .
With my music playing in the background , I'll lure fish .
Cram your good news into my ears .
Madam , madam , Antony's dead !
If you say that , you bastard , you'll kill your Queen .
Kings have trembled to kiss this hand .
Let me say first , madam , that he is well .
Well then , here's more money for you .
But you know , sirrah , we customarily say that the dead are well .
If that's what you mean , I'll melt this gold and pour it down your throat that speaks these hateful words .
Good madam , let me speak .
All right , I will .
But you don't look as if you bring good news .
If you really are Sir Rowland's son , as you've just whispered to me , and I can absolutely see the likeness in your face , you are truly welcome here .
I am the duke who loved your father .
Come to my cave and tell me the rest of your story. , Good old man , you are as welcome here as your master is .
Give him your arm .
Give me your hand , and explain your situation to me .
You haven't seen him since ?
Sir , sir , that can't be true .
If I weren't a merciful man , I'd forget about your missing brother and punish you in his place .
But do this : find your brother , wherever he is .
Bring him here dead or alive within the next year , or get out off my land .
I'm seizing your lands and all that you possess until your brother gives testimony that absolves you of any guilt .
I wish your Highness knew my true feelings in this matter : I have never in my life loved my brother .
That makes you an even bigger villain. , Well , throw him out , and have my officers seize his house and lands .
Do this immediately , and send him packing .
Hang there on this tree , you lines of poetry , and bear witness to my love .
And you , And how are you liking the shepherd's life , Master Touchstone ?
Well , in and of itself , it is a good life , but given that it's a shepherd's life , it's worthless .
In the fact that it's solitary , I enjoy it very much ; but in the sense that it's private , it's terrible .
Now , I'm very pleased with it being outdoors , but in its not being at the court , it is boring .
Are you any kind of philosopher yourself , shepherd ?
You're a natural-born philosopher !
Were you ever at court , shepherd ?
Honestly , no .
Then you are damned .
I hope not .
Explain .
Well , if you were never at court , you were never exposed to good manners ; if you never witnessed good manners , your manners must be wicked ; wickedness is a sin , and committing sins leads to damnation .
You are in a perilous state , shepherd .
Not at all , Touchstone .
The good manners of the court look as silly in the country as country behavior is laughable at the court .
You told me that you don't salute at the court but kiss hands .
Now , if courtiers were shepherds , that kind of courtesy would be unclean .
Give a quick example .
Come , explain .
Why , because we're always handling our ewes , and their fleece , as you know , is greasy .
What , don't courtiers ' hands sweat ?
And isn't a sheep's grease as wholesome as a man's sweat ?
That's a poor example .
A better example , come on .
Besides , our hands are hard and calloused .
Then your lips will feel them more quickly .
Come on .
You worthless man !
You are about as much of a thinker as worm's meat is a nice steak .
Learn from the wise , and comprehend : the courtier's perfume is made from cat discharge , much more disgusting than tar .
Fix your example , shepherd .
Your wit is too courtly for me .
I'll rest now .
Good morning , sir .
Can you tell me whether Rosalind , Duke Senior's daughter , has also been banished ?
Where will the old duke live ?
You're going to rest while you're still damned ?
God help you , foolish man .
Pray God does some surgery on you : you need to be fixed .
That's another sin arising from your ignorance : you bring ewes and rams together and make your living by their copulation .
Here comes young Mr. Ganymede , my new mistress's brother .
There is no jewel like Rosalind .
Her worth is carried on the wind And it blows throughout the world , carrying the name of Rosalind .
All the most beautiful paintings Are black when compared to Rosalind .
Don't think of any beauty But the beauty of Rosalind .
I could rhyme like that for eight years in a row , excepting meal times and sleeping hours .
That awful , plodding rhyme sounded like a row of dairy women stomping off to market .
Oh , stop , fool .
Let me try : If there's a buck who needs a doe Tell him Rosalind will do .
A cat in heat will look for a mate , And Rosalind certainly will too .
Winter garments need to be filled with something , And so does skinny Rosalind .
After you harvest , you have to sheaf and bind So throw ripe Rosalind on the harvest cart .
The sweetest nut has the sourest rind And Rosalind is that kind of nut .
The man who finds the sweetest rose Will be pricked by it , and by Rosalind .
This is exactly the false way that verses gallop along .
Why bother with them ?
Quiet , you stupid fool .
I found them on a tree .
Well , the tree bears rotten fruit .
All right , you've had your say , but we'll let the forest judge whether or not you spoke wisely .
Quiet !
But on the prettiest branches Or at the end of every sentence I'll write "Rosalinda , " Teaching everyone who can read that the essence of every spirit Is contained in this one woman .
Heaven commanded Nature To fill her one body With all the graces that women contain .
Nature took Helen's Cleopatra's majesty , The best of Atalanta , And unhappy Lucretia's modesty .
So , by heaven's decree , Rosalind Was composed Of different faces , eyes , and hearts , so that she might have the most prized touches of all .
Heaven wanted Rosalind to have these gifts And me to live and die as her slave .
Were you listening to these verses ?
Oh yes , I heard them all , and more , too .
Some of those lines had more feet than the That's not a problem : the feet can bear Sure , but these feet were
But did you listen to all that poetry without even wondering about what your name is doing on all these trees ?
Was it a man ?
And he had a chain that once belonged to you hanging around his neck .
Are you blushing ?
Please , who ?
It's difficult to bring two friends together , but even mountains can be moved together by earthquakes .
No , who are you talking about ?
Is it possible ?
No , I'm begging you now , tell me who it is .
Oh , this is wonderful , wonderful , just wonderful wonderful !
Good grief , do you think that just because I'm dressed like a man , I have a man's patience ?
Every second you delay is as long and dull as a journey to South Seas .
I'm begging you , tell me who it is quickly , and speak fast .
I wish you could just stammer this hidden man out of your mouth like wine out of a narrow-necked bottle : either too much at once or none at all .
I'm begging you , take the cork out of your mouth so I can drink the news .
So you want to put a man in your belly .
Did God make him ?
I mean , what sort of man is he ?
Is he enough of a man to wear a hat and grow a beard ?
No , he has only a little beard .
Well , eventually God will send him some more hair , if he thanks Him .
I'll wait till his beard grows in , if you'll just hurry up and tell me what chin that beard is on .
It's Orlando , who triumphed over both the wrestler and you in the same instant .
Damn you for mocking me .
Really , cousin , it's him .
Orlando ?
Orlando .
What did he do when you saw him ?
What did he say ?
How did he look ?
Where did he go ?
What brings him here ?
Did he ask about me ?
Where is he staying ?
How did he say good-bye ?
And when will you see him again ?
Answer me in a word .
You'd better get me But does he know that I'm here in the forest and dressed in men's clothing ?
Does he look as bright and handsome as the day we saw him wrestling ?
But taste my story , and relish it by paying attention .
I found Orlando under a tree , like a dropped acorn .
That tree could be called God's tree , since it drops such wonderful fruit .
Let me talk , good lady .
Go on .
He lay there , stretched out like a wounded knight .
Though that must have been a pitiful sight , the ground looked beautiful .
Cry , "whoa ! " to your tongue , please .
It's leaping about like a frisky horse .
He was dressed like a hunter .
Oh , that's ominous !
He has come to kill my heart .
I'd like to sing my song solo .
You're making me go off-key .
Don't you know that I'm a woman ?
Whatever I think , I have to say .
Sweetheart , go on .
Quiet !
Isn't that him heading this way ?
That's him .
Thanks for your company but , really , I would have preferred being alone .
Me too , but still , for the sake of good manners , I'll say thanks for your company .
Goodbye .
Let's meet as little as we can .
I also hope that we can be better strangers .
Please don't ruin any more trees by carving love poems on their barks .
Please don't ruin any more of my poems by reading them so badly .
Your love's name is Rosalind ?
Yes , that's it .
I don't like her name .
How tall is she ?
Just as tall as my heart .
You're sure full of smooth answers .
Your worst fault is being in love .
Well , it's a fault I wouldn't trade for your best virtue .
I'm tired of you .
There I'll see only myself .
Which is either a fool or a nothing .
I'm not going to waste any more time with you .
Goodbye , good Mr. Love .
I'm glad to see you go .
Adieu , good Mr. Depression .
Very well .
What do you want ?
You should ask me what time of day it is , instead .
There's no clock here in the forest .
Then there must be no lovers in the forest , either , because they're as good as a clock , marking the lazy foot of time with a sigh every minute and a groan every hour .
Indeed I do , sir , and I've come to let you in on a certain problem .
I've been informed by certain sources I can't disclose that your younger brother Orlando plans to fight me in disguise .
Tomorrow , sir , I'm fighting for my reputation , and any man who gets away without a broken bone or two is an exceptional wrestler indeed .
Your brother is young and inexperienced , and because of my affection for you , I'd hate to crush him , though I'd have to , if he challenged me .
I'm telling you all this out of affection for you , so you can either keep him from carrying out his plans or prepare to accept his disgrace , which will be his own fault , not mine .
Charles , I thank you for your loyalty to me , and you'll see that I'll reward you .
I'd heard about my brother's plan and have been subtly trying to change his mind , but he's determined .
I tell you , Charles , he's the stubbornest young fellow in France : overly ambitious , jealous of other people's good qualities , and a traitor against me , his own blood brother .
So use your discretion .
I'd be just as happy if you broke his neck as his finger .
But if I really laid him bare , I'd have to weep and hang my head , and you would not believe me , his behavior is so shocking .
Why didn't you say "the swift steps" of time instead of the "lazy foot" ?
Wouldn't that have been just as appropriate ?
No , not at all , sir .
Time travels at different speeds for different people .
I can tell you who time strolls for , who it trots for , who it gallops for , and who it stops cold for .
Okay , who does it trot for ?
Who does time amble for ?
Time ambles for both men .
Who does it gallop for ?
Who does it stand still for ?
For lawyers on vacation , because they sleep their holidays away , with no sense of how time moves .
Where do you live , pretty young man ?
Were you born here ?
Just like the rabbit , who lives where she is born .
Your speech is more refined than I would expect in such a remote place as this .
Many people have told me so .
Actually , an old religious uncle of mine taught me how to speak , and he was brought up in the city .
Thank God I'm not a woman and afflicted with all the giddiness that troubles that entire sex .
What were the primary evils he claimed women were guilty of ?
There were no primary ones .
Please , tell me some of them .
No , I won't give my medicine away to anyone but the sick .
There's a man haunting this forest who abuses the trees by carving "Rosalind" on their barks .
Well , I'm the man you're speaking of .
Please , tell me your cure .
But you don't have any of the symptoms my uncle told me about .
He taught me how to recognize a man in love , and you're not a prisoner of love , I'm sure .
What did he say the symptoms were ?
A thin face , which you don't have ; a sleepless , sunken eye , which you don't have ; an irritable temper , which you don't have ; a neglected beard , which you don't have , but that might not be so telling , since you don't have much beard anyway .
Your stockings should be falling down around your ankles , your hat flying off your head , your sleeves unbuttoned , your shoes untied , and everything about you demonstrating carelessness and misery .
But you're no such man .
You're so neat and well put-together that you look like you love yourself more than anyone else .
Young boy , I wish I could make you believe that I'm in love .
Make me believe it ?
But really , are you the one who's been hanging on the trees those poems that speak so admiringly of Rosalind ?
I swear to you by Rosalind's own pretty hand that I am that unfortunate man .
Are you really as in love as your poems declare ?
Neither rhyme nor reason can express how much I love her .
The only reason they don't get punished and cured is that the disease is so commonplace that the nuthouse nurses are usually suffering from it , too .
But I promise it can be cured with some guidance .
Have you ever cured anyone this way before ?
Yes , one , and this is how I did it .
I don't want to be cured , boy .
I could cure you , if you just called me Rosalind and came by my cottage every day to woo me .
By my faith in love , I will , then .
Tell me where you live .
Come with me , I'll show you , and along the way , you can tell me where you live .
Will you come ?
Wholeheartedly , good young man .
No , you have to call me Rosalind. , Sister , you're coming ?
Come on , sweet Audrey .
I'll get your goats , Audrey .
Do my simple features please you ?
Your features , God help us !
What features ?
Really , Audrey , I wish you were more poetical .
I don't know what "poetical" means .
Is it "chaste in word and action" ?
Does it mean being truthful ?
Not really , for the truest poetry is often the most artificial .
But you still wish the gods had made me poetical ?
I do , in fact .
Right now you swear to me that you are a virgin ; if you were a poet , I might have some hope you were lying .
What , you don't want me to be chaste ?
Not really , unless you were ugly .
Well , I'm not beautiful , so I hope that I can at least be chaste .
I'm not a slut , I keep myself clean , but I thank God I am ugly .
Well , praise the Lord you're ugly .
Well , God bless this marriage !
Amen .
Well , that's what the wife brings to the marriage .
Horns ?
Well , there they are .
Only for poor men ?
No , no .
The nobleman's are as huge as the underfed villager's .
Is the single man lucky , then ?
No .
Just as a town protected by a wall around it is worth more than a low-lying village , a married man's horned forehead is more honorable than a bachelor's bare forehead .
Here comes Sir Oliver .
Will you marry us here , under this tree , or should we follow you to your chapel ?
Is there anyone to give the bride away ?
I don't want to take another man's second-hand goods .
No , someone has to give her away or the marriage isn't legal .
How are you , sir ?
We're glad to see you .
God bless you for being here .
I'm very glad to see you .
This is just a trifling matter here , sir .
No , no , put your hat back on .
Do you want to get married , fool ?
Just as the ox has his yoke , the horse its bridle , the falcon a tether , a man has his desires , to keep in check .
And , being a man of your breeding , you're going to be married under some shrubs like a beggar ?
Get yourself to a church and have a proper priest , who can tell you what marriage is all about , marry you .
Then one of you will warp and pull away , and there goes your marriage .
Come with me and let me advise you .
Come , sweet Audrey .
We have to be married properly .
None of these deranged rascals can shake me from my profession .
Don't talk to me .
I'm going to cry .
Go ahead if you want , but remember that crying doesn't suit a man .
But don't I have good reason to cry ?
As good a reason as any .
So go ahead and cry .
His kiss is as holy as bread blessed by a priest .
I'm very glad I came to see you .
If he shows up tomorrow , I'll give him what's coming to him .
If he can manage to walk after our fight , I'll never wrestle for money again .
Farewell , my lord .
But not for long ; Charles will take care of everything .
But you heard him swear up and down that he was .
He's staying in the forest with your father now .
I met my father in the woods yesterday and had a long conversation with him .
He laughed at that and let me go .
He writes brave poems , speaks brave words , makes brave promises , and then breaks them just as bravely .
He's like a cowardly
Who's coming here ?
Mistress and master , you've often asked about that lovelorn shepherd you once saw me sitting with , the one who complained about the disdainful shepherdess he was in love with .
Yes , what about him ?
Sweet Phoebe , do not scorn me .
Do not , Phoebe .
Go ahead and say you don't love me , but not so bitterly .
Faint , fall down , if you don't , then you're lying about my eyes being murderers .
Come on , show me the wound that my eyes have caused .
But my eyes , which I've darted at you , haven't even left a mark .
Now I am sure that eyes can't hurt a person .
Oh , darling Phoebe , if you ever fall in love with some fresh face , then you'll know about the invisible wounds that love's sharp arrows can make .
Well , until that time , don't come near me .
And when that time comes , then you can mock me , but please don't pity me , because I won't pity you .
But mistress , know yourself .
Get down on your knees and thank heaven for sending you such a good man .
Ask this man's forgiveness , love him , and accept his offer .
So take her , shepherd , and God bless you .
Besides , I don't like you .
Come on , sister .
And don't be proud .
The whole world could look at you , and no one would be as blind as he is , thinking you're beautiful .
Sweet Phoebe , have pity on me .
Well , I'm sorry for you , gentle Silvius .
Then both my grief and your sorrow will be cured .
You have my friendship .
Isn't that enough ?
I want you .
Well , that's just greedy .
But don't expect any more than that .
Do you know the boy who was just speaking to me ?
Not very well , but I've met him several times .
Don't think I'm in love with him just because I'm asking about him .
But what do I care about words ?
And yet , words are a good thing when the man speaking them is pleasant to listen to .
He's awfully proud , but his pride suits him .
He'll grow up to be a proper man .
He's not very tall , but he's tall enough for his age .
His legs aren't great , but they're alright .
His lips were nice and red , a little more lively and passionate than the red that was in his cheeks , one was pure red and the other more pink .
What right did he have to scold me like that ?
He said my eyes and my hair were black and , now that I think of it , he scorned me .
I'm surprised I didn't bite back .
But no matter , I'll get back at him soon enough .
I'll write him a taunting letter , and you can deliver it .
Will you do that for me , Silvius ?
With all my heart , Phoebe .
I'll be bitter toward him , and curt .
Come with me , Silvius .
Please , pretty young man , I'd like to get to know you better .
They say you are a melancholy fellow .
I am .
I like it better than laughing .
People who are either too serious or too silly are awful .
Well , I think it's good to be serious and keep quiet .
In that case it's good to be a post .
I don't have the proud melancholy of a courtier or the ambitious melancholy of a soldier or the calculated melancholy of a lawyer .
You're a traveler .
Well then , you have good reason to be sad .
I'm afraid you've sold your own land to see other men's .
To have seen much but own nothing is to have rich eyes and poor hands .
Not true .
And your experience makes you sad .
I'd rather have a jester to make me happy than experience to make me sad , and to travel for all that trouble , no less !
Good day and happiness to you , darling Rosalind .
My beautiful Rosalind , I'm only an hour late .
Please , Rosalind , my sweet cousin , be happy .
Dear Celia , I already look much happier than I feel , but you want me to look even happier ?
Unless you can also teach me how to forget my banished father , you shouldn't try to teach me how to be happy .
Well , by this I can see that you don't love me as much as I love you .
If Well , I'll just forget the difficulties of my situation , in order to focus on the happiness of yours .
I swear I will , and if I ever break my promise let me turn into a monster .
So please , my sweet Rose , my dear Rose , be happy .
From now on I will , cousin , and I'll think of all kinds of games for us .
Let me see , what do you think about falling in love ?
You'd break a date with your beloved by a whole hour ?
Forgive me , darling Rosalind .
No , if you're ever late like this again , I'll refuse to see you .
I'd rather be wooed by a snail .
A snail ?
Besides , he brings his fate with him .
What fate is that ?
Why , his cuckold's horns , of course , the kind you men are always blaming on your wives .
See , the snail already has its horns , which prevents nasty rumors from spreading about his wife's infidelity .
A virtuous woman won't give her husband horns , and my Rosalind is definitely virtuous .
And I am your Rosalind .
Come on , woo me , woo me .
I'm in a good mood now and likely to give you what you want .
What would you say to me now if I really were your precious little Rosalind ?
I'd kiss you before I spoke .
No , it would be better to speak first and kiss only after you've run out of things to say .
When good orators finish talking , they spit ; when lovers do ( God help us if they ever do ) , they kiss .
What if she won't kiss me ?
Who could be out of things to say if he were with the girl he loves ?
Indeed , you would be out if I were your mistress , if my chastity is worth as much as my wit .
Aren't I your Rosalind ?
I like to pretend you are , because then it's almost like actually talking to her .
No , you won't die yourself , but only by proxy .
This world is almost six thousand years old , and in all this time not one man has ever actually died from love .
Then love me , Rosalind .
Okay , I will , on Fridays and Saturdays , and the rest .
And will you have me ?
Sure , and twenty others just like you .
What's that ?
Well , aren't you a good man ?
I hope so .
And can a person ever have too much of a good thing ? , Come on , sister , you can be the priest and marry us. , Give me your hand , Orlando. , What do you say , sister ?
Please , marry us .
I do .
Okay , but when ?
Right now ; as fast as she can say the vows .
Then you have to say , "I take you , Rosalind , to be my lawfully wedded wife." I take you , Rosalind , to be my lawfully wedded wife .
Maybe I should ask you what right you have to take me , but I'll take you , Orlando , to be my husband .
So do all thoughts .
They have wings .
Now tell me how long you intend to keep her .
Forever and a day .
No , Orlando , men are like April when they're wooing a girl , young , and passionate , but like December once they're married and their passions have cooled .
I'll be more jealous of you than a wild rooster over his hen ; more noisy than a parrot chattering about the rain ; more fond of new things than an ape ; more giddy about getting what I want than a monkey .
I'll cry at nothing , and I'll always do it when you're in a good mood .
And when you want to go to sleep , I'll be up laughing like a hyena .
But will my Rosalind do this , too ?
But she is wise .
Right .
The wiser the woman , the wilder .
If you close the doors on a woman's wit , it'll fly out the window .
If you shut the windows , it will pour out the keyhole .
If you stop up the keyhole , it will escape from the chimney along with the smoke .
A man with a wife like that might ask , "Hey , wandering wit , where are you off to ? " Nah , better save the questions for when you find her in your neighbor's bed .
You'll never find her without an answer unless you find her without a tongue .
A woman who doesn't know how to make her own indiscretions look like her husband's fault is hardly a woman .
Rosalind , I have to leave you for two hours .
I must join the duke for lunch .
I'll be back here with you by two o'clock .
Oh , go , leave me .
I knew you'd turn out this way .
My friends told me as much , and I knew it , too .
So , take me , death !
You'll be back at two o'clock ?
Yes , sweet Rosalind .
So beware of my contempt , and keep your promise .
I'll keep my promise just as if you really were Rosalind .
So , goodbye .
Well , time is the old judge that tries your kind of criminal .
Goodbye .
You have absolutely abused our sex in this love talk of yours .
We should rip off your man's clothing and show the world the woman who has represented her own kind so badly .
Oh cousin , cousin , cousin , my sweet little cousin , I wish you knew how deep in love I am .
Or it's bottomless , at least : pour affection in one end , and it runs out the other .
Cupid , that blind bastard son of Venus , conceived from a thought and anger , born from insanity , that blind , naughty boy who makes everyone else go blind just because he can't see himself , let Cupid judge how deep my love runs .
I'm telling you , Aliena , I can't stand being apart from Orlando .
I'm going to find some shade and sigh until he returns .
And I'm going to sleep .
Which one of you killed the deer ?
Yes , sir .
Then sing it .
It doesn't matter if it's in tune so long as it's loud enough .
What do you say now ?
Isn't it past two o'clock ?
And I see a lot of Orlando here .
Look who's coming .
No , I swear , I don't even know what's in it .
Phoebe wrote it .
Well , then , what should we do for fun instead ?
Let's go find that hussy , Fortune , and and mock her till she starts distributing her gifts more equally .
Oh , really ?
Well , when Nature makes a person beautiful , can't Fortune make her fall into a fire , thereby making her ugly after all ?
And even though Nature has given us the wit to have this argument , hasn't Fortune sent this fool here to stop us ?
Come on , you're a fool , and driven to extreme measures by love .
The point is that she didn't write this letter .
These are a man's words , and his handwriting .
I'm telling you , it's hers .
Why , she challenges me like a Muslim would challenge a Christian .
No , a woman's gentle brain could never have come up with such crude expressions and even harsher meanings .
Do you want to hear what she says ?
If you want to read it , as I haven't heard it yet , though I've heard too much of Phoebe's cruelty .
She's Phoebe-ing me .
Listen to what the tyrant says .
You call that ranting ?
You call this sneering ?
Why do you pity him ?
Follow them straight to the cottage .
Since you asked , I suppose it's not bragging to say that we are .
Orlando sends his regards to you both , and he sends this bloody handkerchief to the boy he calls "his Rosalind." Is that you ?
It is .
It's about who I am , and how , why , and where this handkerchief was stained .
Please , tell us .
He looked to the side , and pay attention to what he saw then : under an oak tree , whose lower branches were mossy with age and top branches ancient and brittle , he saw a wretched beggar , with overgrown hair and beard , asleep on his back .
He discovered that the man was his older brother .
Oh , I've heard him talk about that brother , and he described him as the most inhumane man alive .
He turned away twice and almost left him there .
But his kindness was nobler than even his desire for revenge , his natural goodness was stronger than his need to give his brother what he deserved .
Are you his brother ?
Was it you that he rescued ?
Was it you that was always plotting to kill him ?
That was me , but it's not me , I'm not ashamed to tell you what I once was , since I'm so happy to have since converted .
But what about the bloody handkerchief ?
I'll get there .
After a brief time , as he is a strong , brave man ,
Many people faint when they see blood .
There's more to it than that. , Ganymede !
Look , he's recovering .
I want to go home .
We'll take you there .
Please , will you take his arm ?
Buck up , boy !
You're a man ?
You don't have a man's courage .
It's true , I confess .
Oh , sir , someone would think I was a good fake .
Please tell your brother what a convincing show I put on .
Whoo-hoo !
That was no show .
Your cheeks are too flushed for me to believe that was a fake faint .
Fake , I'm telling you .
Well , then , be brave and pretend to be a man .
That's what I'm doing .
But honestly , I should have been a woman .
Come on , you keep getting paler .
I'll do that , because I have to tell my brother how you forgave him , Rosalind .
I'll think of something .
But please , tell him how well I faked a faint .
Will you come with us ?
We'll get married at some point , Audrey .
Be patient .
Really , the priest was good enough , no matter what that old guy said .
No , he was wicked and vile .
But Audrey , there's a boy in the forest who claims you're his girl .
Here comes the man himself .
It warms my heart to encounter such a country bumpkin .
How old are you , friend ?
Twenty-five , sir .
A mature age .
Is your name William ?
Yes , it's William , sir .
A good name .
Were you born here in the forest ?
Yes sir , thank God .
Thank God" , that's a good answer .
Are you rich ?
Well , so-so .
So-so" is good , very good , an excellent answer .
And then again , it's not so good , but only so-so .
Are you wise ?
Yes sir , I'm fairly witty .
Well , that's a fine answer .
Give me your hand .
Are you educated ?
No , sir .
Then learn this from me : if you have something , you have it .
Everyone knows that when you pour a drink out of a cup and into a glass , the cup becomes empty .
Why , the he that will marry this woman .
Or , rather , I'll kill you , or I'll do away with you , or I'll turn your life into death and your freedom into captivity .
I'll poison you , or beat you with a club , or stab you with a sword .
I'll bandy you about and overwhelm you with my cleverness .
I will , in other words , kill you in three hundred and fifty ways .
Therefore , tremble with fear and leave .
Do what he says , William .
Farewell , sir .
Our master and mistress are looking for you .
Let's go .
Hurry up , Audrey , hurry. , I'm coming , I'm coming .
Mistress , you have to go see your father .
Did they make you the messenger ?
From a certain knight who swore on his honor that the pancakes he was eating were good , and that the mustard on top of them , he swore on his honor , was bad .
Now , I'll swear to the opposite , that the pancakes were rotten , and the mustard was fine , but even so , the knight wasn't lying .
And how , out of your great heap of knowledge , will you manage to prove that ?
Yes , please ; unleash your wisdom .
Watch me : stroke your chins and swear by your beards that I am a knave .
By our beards ( if we had them ) , you are a knave .
And I swear by my wickedness ( if I had any ) that I am a knave .
Is it really possible that you could like her right after meeting her ?
It will be to your advantage , because I'll leave our father's house and all his property to you , while I live and die a shepherd here in the forest .
You have my consent .
You can be married tomorrow if you want .
I'll invite the duke and all of his followers .
Go get Aliena ready , because , look , here comes my Rosalind .
And hello to you , fair sister .
Oh , darling Orlando , it's so hard to see you wearing your heart in a sling .
Actually , it's my arm .
I thought your heart had been wounded by a lion's claws .
They're in the heat of passion ; they simply have to be together .
You couldn't beat the two of them apart .
They'll be married tomorrow , and I'll invite the duke to the ceremony .
But , oh , it makes me bitter to look at happiness through another man's eyes .
Tomorrow I'll be at the depths of my misery thinking about the happiness my brother has achieved , in having what he wished for .
Well then , can't I act as Rosalind for you tomorrow ?
I can't live by pretending anymore .
I won't exhaust you anymore with idle chitchat .
You should know that I think you're a smart man .
Believe me , then , that I have special powers .
Since I was three years old , I've been in contact with a powerful but virtuous magician , no black magic here .
If you love Rosalind as much as you say you do , you will marry her when your brother marries Aliena .
I know where she is and , if you don't mind , I will set her before you tomorrow , whole and unharmed .
Are you serious ?
I swear on my life , which I take pretty seriously , even if I am a magician .
Look , here comes someone who loves me , along with someone who loves her .
I don't care .
A faithful shepherd worships you .
Silvius , tell this youth what it means to be in love .
It means being full of sighs and tears , like I am for Phoebe .
And like I am for Ganymede .
And like I am for Rosalind .
And like I am for no woman .
It means being faithful and ready to serve , just like I am for Phoebe .
And like I am for Ganymede .
And like I am for Rosalind .
And like I am for no woman .
It means being filled with fantasy ; with passion and wishes ; with adoration , loyalty , and devotion .
And I for Rosalind .
And I for no woman .
Since you know all this is true , why do you blame me for loving you ?
And why do you blame me for loving you ?
And why do you blame me for loving you ?
Who are you talking to ?
I'm saying it to the girl who isn't here and doesn't hear me .
All right , stop this .
You sound like a pack of wolves howling at the moon .
As long as I'm alive , I'll be here .
Me too .
Me too .
Tomorrow is the happy day , Audrey .
We'll be married tomorrow .
I hope it doesn't make me unchaste that I really want to be a married woman .
Here come two of Duke Senior's pages .
Good afternoon , good gentleman .
It really is good to see you .
Come , sit , sit , and sing me a song .
Sounds good to us .
Sit between us .
Should we just get down to it ?
Yes , yes , and let's sing in unison , like two gypsies riding on a single horse .
Really , young men , though it wasn't a very hard song to get right , the music was still all out of tune .
Orlando , do you really believe that this boy can do everything he's promised ?
Yes , even if I had whole kingdoms to give along with her .
I will , even if I were king of all kingdoms .
Yes , even if I die an hour later .
But if you decide not to marry me , you'll marry this faithful shepherd instead ?
That's the deal .
Even if marrying her meant I died .
I've promised to make everything right .
Phoebe , keep your promise to marry me , and to marry this shepherd if you choose to refuse me .
Silvius , keep your promise to marry Phoebe if she refuses me .
I'll leave now , to set all these things right .
This shepherd boy reminds me quite vividly of my daughter .
My lord , when I first saw him I thought he was your daughter's brother .
But , my lord , this boy was born in the forest and has been schooled not in the usual subjects but only in magic .
My lord , welcome this man .
This is the jester I have met so many times in the forest .
He swears he used to be a courtier .
If anyone doubts this , let him put me on trial .
I have bankrupted three tailors .
I have quarreled four times , and almost got in a fight .
And how was that one settled ?
Well , we almost fought and then realized that we had reached the seventh cause .
What do you mean , the seventh cause ?
I like him very well .
Tell me , who is this knight ?
A man old Frederick , your father , loves .
If he has my father's love , then that's enough honor for me .
Enough of this .
No more talk about my father ; you'll be whipped for slander one of these days .
It's a pity that fools aren't allowed to speak wisely about the foolish things that wise men do .
Honestly , you're speaking the truth , ever since the fools were With his mouth full of news .
Which he'll shove down our throats the way pigeons feed their young .
Then we'll be stuffed with news .
Well that's good .
If we're Hello , Monsieur Le Beau .
What's the news ?
Fair princess , you've missed some good sport .
Sport ?
Of what
God bless you , sir .
This poor virgin isn't much to look at , sir , but she's mine .
Really , he's very witty , and full of wise sayings .
But back to that argument you mentioned .
What's the "seventh cause" ?
I didn't like the way a particular courtier had cut his beard .
He sent me word that , whether I liked it or not , he liked it fine .
They call this "the argumentative countercheck." And so on through "the circumstantial lie" and "the direct lie." And how many times did you say his beard wasn't cut well ?
He's as smart as they come , but just a jester .
He uses his clownishness to disguise his deadly wit .
There is laughter in heaven When earthly affairs are put right And people unite .
Good duke , come receive your daughter .
Hymen brought her from heaven Yes , brought her here .
If my eyes don't deceive me , you are my daughter .
If my eyes don't deceive me , you are my Rosalind .
If my eyes aren't deceiving me , goodbye , love .
Quiet !
My niece , you are welcome here as if you were my own daughter .
Let me have your attention for a moment .
I'm Sir Rowland's middle son , and I bring you news .
When Duke Frederick heard that great , worthy men were coming to this forest every day , he raised a large army to invade this land and fight his brother .
I swear on my life that I'm speaking the truth .
Do you mean to say that the duke has abandoned the glamorous court to live as a monk ?
Yes , he has .
I will go find him .
There is much to be learned from these converts .
Stay , Jaques , stay here for a bit .
No , this fun is not for me .
I'll wait for you in your cave , where you can tell me what you need from me .
Let's proceed .
We'll begin the ceremony the way we hope it will end , with delight .
If it's true that you don't need
What color , madam ?
I don't understand , how should I answer that ?
However your wit and luck allow .
Tell us about this wrestling .
Well , we've missed the beginning ; it's dead and buried .
There comes an old man with his three sons , It sounds like the beginning of an old folktale .
Three proper young men , all good looking and with great presence ,
Right , and they wore proclamations around their necks , saying , "Be it known to all men by these The eldest of the three brothers wrestled with Charles , the duke's wrestler .
Charles did the same to the second brother , and the third .
They're lying over there , and the poor old man , their father , weeps so piteously over them that the whole audience has joined him in grieving .
Oh , dear !
But tell me , monsieur , what sport are the ladies missing ?
Why , the one I just told you about .
Me too , I swear .
Doesn't anyone else want to see this , and hear breath wheezing out from broken ribs ?
Shall we go watch this wrestling , cousin ?
Yes , I see them coming .
Let's stay and watch .
Come on .
Since the youth won't be reasoned with , he'll have to suffer for his stubbornness .
Is that the man ?
That's him , madam .
Alas , he is too young .
Yet he seems capable .
What's up , daughter and niece ?
Have you snuck over here to watch the wrestling ?
Yes , my lord , if you give us permission .
You won't enjoy it much , I can tell you , the odds are so against this young man .
Because he's so young , I've tried to discourage him , but he won't listen .
Call him over here , good Monsieur Le Beau .
I remember , Adam , that's Here comes my master , your brother .
Go hide , Adam , and you'll hear how he abuses me .
Mister Challenger , the princess wants to speak to you .
I'll wait on them with all respect and duty .
Young man , have you challenged Charles the Wrestler ?
No , lovely princess .
He is the general challenger .
I have only come in , like the others have , to try to fight him with the strength of my youth .
Young gentleman , you are too bold for your age .
You have seen the cruel proof of this man's strength .
If you took a good look at yourself , or if you thought about this more carefully , your fear would teach you to act more cautiously .
We beg you , for your own sake , to respect your safety and give up .
Please , young sir .
If I'm killed , it will only be the death of a man who was willing to be dead .
I won't wrong any of my friends , because I don't have any to mourn for me , and I won't have wronged the world , because I don't have anything in the world .
In this world , I'm only taking up space .
I wish I could give you the little strength that I have .
Mine too , to join hers .
Good luck .
I hope to God I'm wrong about your chances .
I hope you get what you desire !
You get only one round .
No , I'm sure your Grace won't be able to persuade him to try a second round , even though you couldn't dissuade him from trying the first .
You should mock me I wish I were invisible , so I could grab that strong fellow by the leg .
Oh , what an excellent young man !
If I could shoot lightning bolts from my eyes , I can tell you who'd be on the ground .
No more , no more .
How are you doing , Charles ?
He can't speak , my lord .
Carry him away .
What is your name , young man ?
Orlando , my lord , the youngest son of Sir Rowland de Boys .
I wish you were someone else's son .
The whole world thought your father was an honorable man , but he was always my enemy .
I wish you had told me you had a different father .
If I were my father , cousin , would I do this ?
I'm proud to be Sir Rowland's son , his youngest son , and I would never change that , not even to be Frederick's adopted heir .
My father loved Sir Rowland as much as he loved his own soul , and the rest of the world shared my father's opinion .
If I had known this young man was his son , I would have tried harder to convince him not to fight .
Gentle cousin , let's go thank him and encourage him .
Yes .
Good luck , fair gentleman .
He's calling us back .
My Will you come on , cousin ?
I'm coming .
Farewell .
What is this passion that ties up my tongue ?
I can't speak to her , even though she asked me to .
Either Charles or some prettier thing has mastered you .
Good sir , as a friend , I advise you to leave this place .
Although you deserve praise , applause , and love , right now the duke misconstrues everything you've done .
The duke is temperamental .
But I will tell you that lately the duke has been displeased with his niece , and for no other reason than that people praise her virtues and pity her for her father's sake .
Goodbye , sir .
Later , in a better world than this , I'd love to get to know you .
I'm indebted to you .
Goodbye .
Out of the frying pan and into the fire , from a tyrant duke to a tyrant brother !
But , oh , heavenly Rosalind !
What's going on , Rosalind ?
I don't even have one to throw at a dog .
No , your words are too precious to be wasted on dogs .
Throw some of your words at me .
Then there would be two cousins lying sick in bed : one hurt by reasons and the other gone crazy without any .
Is all of this about your father ?
No , some of it is about my child's father .
If we walk on the well-worn paths , they won't get caught in our petticoats .
Cough them up .
I'd try it , if I could cry "hem" and have him .
Come on , take control of your feelings .
But they're siding with a better wrestler than myself .
Oh , that's a good wish !
You'll fight with him eventually , and The duke , my father , loved his father very much .
Does that necessarily mean you should love his son ?
By that kind of logic , I should hate Orlando , since my father hates his father .
But I don't hate Orlando .
No , please don't hate him , for my sake .
Why shouldn't I ?
Doesn't he deserve it ?
Let me love him because he deserves it , and you can love him because I do .
Look , here comes the duke .
He looks angry .
Madam , hurry as fast as you can get out of my court .
Me , uncle ?
You , niece .
In ten days time , if you're found within twenty miles of the court , you'll die for it .
Please , your Grace , tell me what crime I have committed .
If I know my own thoughts and desires , and I'm not dreaming or crazy , which I'm sure I'm not , then , dear uncle , I've never had so much as a half-formed thought that would have offended you .
All traitors protest like this .
If they could purge their guilt simply by saying that they were innocent , they'd all be as innocent as God Himself .
I don't trust you .
You are your father's daughter .
That's enough .
I was his daughter when your Highness took my father's dukedom .
I was his daughter when you banished him .
My father wasn't a traitor .
So , please , my lord , don't assume that I'm treacherous just because I'm poor , with no titles to my name .
Dear master , listen to me .
Yes , Celia , we kept her here for your sake .
I was too young at the time to appreciate her value , but now I know her .
If she's a traitor , why then , so am I .
You're a fool .
You will seem even brighter and more virtuous when she's out of the picture .
So be quiet .
The sentence I've passed down on her is firm and unshakeable .
She is banished .
Then lay that sentence on me too , my lord .
I can not live without her .
You are a fool. , You , niece , prepare to leave .
On my honor and by my word , if you outstay the ten days , you will die .
Oh , my poor Rosalind , where will you go ?
Do you want to exchange fathers ?
I'll give you mine .
I insist , don't be more distressed than I am .
I have more reason to be distressed .
Hey , you !
What are you Nothing .
I've never been taught how to make anything .
Well , then , what are you messing up ?
I'm helping Indeed , sir , find something better to do and get lost for a while .
Should I tend your pigs and eat husks with them ?
When did I Do you know where you are , sir ?
Yes , sir , very well , I'm here in your orchard .
Do you know whom you're talking to ?
Yes , better than you know me .
I know you're my oldest brother , and deserve more respect .
I have as much of our father in me as you do , though I admit you're closer to him and matter more because you're older .
No you haven't , cousin .
Please , be cheerful .
Don't you realize the duke has also banished me , his daughter ?
No , he hasn't .
Oh , he hasn't ?
Well , then , you don't have the affection that would teach you that you and I are one .
Will we be separated ?
Should we part , sweet girl ?
I swear by the heavens , which have grown pale in sympathy with us , I'm going with you , whatever you say .
But where will we go ?
To the Forest of Arden , to find your father .
But what danger we'll put ourselves in , two young , innocent women traveling so far !
Fresh beauty attracts thugs and thieves even more than money .
I'll put on some poor and ragged clothes and smudge my face with dirt .
Wouldn't it be better , since I'm unusually tall for a woman , to dress myself like a man ?
I'll wear a big sword in my belt , carry a boar-spear in my hand , and hide all my womanish fear in my heart .
What should I call you when you're a man ?
I'll take no lesser name than that of Something that refers to my current state .
Instead of Celia , call me Aliena .
Wouldn't he be a comfort to us in our travels ?
Let's go gather our jewels and money .
We'll figure out the best time and safest route to avoid being found out by my father's guards , whom he'll send out as soon as he discovers I've gone .
Now , we go contentedly to freedom , not banishment .
Now , my companions and brothers in exile , hasn't experience made this simple life sweeter than a life of glittery pomp and circumstance ?
Aren't these woods less perilous than the court , with all its jealousies and intrigues ?
I smile and think , "Thank goodness the wind doesn't flatter me : it's like a councilor who makes me feel what I'm really made of." Adversity can have its benefits , like the ugly , poisonous I wouldn't change my situation for anything .
You're lucky , my lord , to be able to see the peace and sweetness even in what bad luck has brought you .
Come , shall we hunt some deer for dinner ?
It bothers me , though , that these poor spotted innocents , who , after all , are this deserted city's native citizens , should be gouged with arrows .
Indeed , my lord , the gloomy Jaques grieves over these deaths .
Big , round tears ran piteously down the animal's innocent nose .
And did you leave him like this ?
We did , my lord , weeping and carrying on about the sobbing deer .
Take me to him .
I love to argue with him when he's having one of these fits , because then he always has a lot to say .
I'll bring you to him right away .
Can it be possible that no one saw them leave ?
It can not be .
Some villains in my court must have known about this and let it happen .
I can't find anyone who saw her leave .
Her ladies-in-waiting saw her go to bed , and early this morning the bed was empty .
My lord , that dirty clown whom you laughed at so often is also missing .
Send a message to his brother .
Bring that swinger Orlando here .
If he's not around , bring his brother Oliver to me .
I'll make Oliver find him .
Do this immediately , and don't stop searching and interrogating until you've brought home these foolish runaways .
Who's there ?
What are you doing here ?
Why are you so strong and good ?
Why do people love you ?
And why are you noble , strong , and brave ?
Why would you be so foolish as to beat the moody duke's favorite champion ?
Your praise has beaten you home .
Don't you know , master , that some men's best qualities do them in ?
Oh , what a world this is , when even what is beautiful in a man poisons him !
Why , what's the matter ?
In this house lives a man who despises all that is good in you .
Oliver , your brother , no , not your brother ; and yet he's the son , but no , I won't call him the son , of that great man I was about to call his father , has heard about how well you did in the wrestling match , and tonight he's planning on burning your house down , with you in it .
And if he fails at that , he will find other ways to kill you .
I overheard him and his plans .
This is no place for you ; this home is now a slaughterhouse .
Hate it , fear it , do not come inside .
Then where would you have me go , Adam ?
It doesn't matter where , so long as it's not here .
What , would you have me beg for my food ?
This is all that's left for me to do , but I won't do it .
I'd rather give myself up to the hatred of a violent brother who refuses to recognize that we are brothers .
But don't do that .
Let me be your servant .
I know I may be old , but I'm strong and healthy , because in my youth I never drank nor lived recklessly .
Therefore , my old age is like a blustery winter : cold , but kindly .
Let me go with you .
I'll do everything a younger man could do for you .
Oh , good old man , you're a great example of that old work ethic , where people worked because it was their duty , not just for the money .
Come along , though .
We'll go together , and before we've spent all the savings of your youth , we'll find a way to make a living .
Go on , master , and I will follow you , with truth and loyalty to my last breath .
From the time I was seventeen , over sixty years ago , I have lived in this house , but now I will live here no more .
Many men seek their fortune at seventeen ; at eighty , it's a bit late .
But fortune could not reward me better than to let me die well , without owing my master anything .
Oh Lord , my spirits are tired !
I wouldn't care about my spirits , if my legs weren't tired .
I can't go any further .
I'd rather bear with you than Well , this is the Forest of Arden .
Yes , now I'm in Arden , and that makes me the bigger fool .
Yes , be content , good Touchstone .
Look who's coming : a young man and an old man , having a serious talk .
What , you dare put your hands on me , villain ?
I'm no villain .
If you weren't my brother , I'd leave this hand of mine on your neck until I'd pulled out your tongue for talking like this .
You've only insulted yourself .
Gentlemen , calm down .
For the sake of your father's memory , make peace .
Let me go , I say .
I won't until I'm ready .
You will listen to me .
My father instructed you in his will to give me a good education .
But you've raised me as a peasant , hiding from me what I needed to become a gentleman .
My father's spirit is growing in me , and I won't take this any longer .
And what are you going to do after you've spent your money ?
Well , sir , go inside .
I'm not going to be bothered by you for long .
You'll get some of what you want .
Now please leave me alone .
What you're doing is the way to make her scorn you continually .
Oh , Corin , I wish you could understand how much I love her !
I'm sure I can guess .
No Corin , since you're old , you can not guess , even if you were as dedicated a lover in your youth as there ever was , sighing and mooning all night long .
If your love was anything like mine , and I'm sure that no man has loved as I love now , exactly how many ridiculous actions did your fantasizing lead you to ?
Oh , a thousand of them , all of which I've forgotten .
Oh , then you never loved as wholeheartedly as me .
If you can't remember the stupidest little thing love made you do , you haven't loved .
Or if you haven't sat as I do now , boring your listener with all your lover's virtues , then you haven't loved .
Or if you haven't broken away from human company , as my feelings now lead me to do , you haven't loved .
O Phoebe , Phoebe , Phoebe !
Oh , poor shepherd !
Me too .
I remember when I was in love , I broke my sword on a stone , and told him to take that for coming at night to see Jane Smile .
I remember kissing her washing stick and the cow's udders that her pretty , chapped hands had milked .
I remember wooing a pea plant in her name , and then taking two pea pods and begging her to wear them "for my sake." Those of us who are really in love will do the strangest things .
But everything that lives is mortal , including the foolishness of love .
You speak more wisely than you know .
Nah , I'll never be aware of my own wit , until I break my shins on it .
By God !
And like mine , but I'm getting a little tired of it .
Please , one of you go ask that man over there if we can buy some food off him .
Shut up , fool .
He's not your relative .
Who's calling ?
Your superiors .
Please sir , if love or money can buy anything in this empty place , tell us where we can rest and feed ourselves .
Dear sir , I pity the lady and wish , more for her sake than my own , that I was more able to help her .
But I'm a hired hand : I don't profit from the flocks I tend .
Besides , his cottage , his flocks , and his grazing rights are on sale now , and since he's not there , there's nothing to eat at our house .
Who wants to buy the flock and the pasture ?
That young man who was just here .
Please , if you can do it without taking advantage of the young man , buy the cottage , pasture , and flock for us , and we'll pay you for it .
And we will raise your wages .
The thing is definitely going to be sold .
Come with me .
If you like what you see of the land , the profit that's possible , and this rustic life , I'll be your faithful servant , and buy the place with your gold right away .
More , more , please , more .
It's only going to make you sad , Monsieur Jaques .
I'm glad about that .
More , please , more .
I can suck sadness out of a song the way a weasel sucks eggs .
More , please , more .
My voice is ragged .
I know I won't please you .
Come on , another stanza , is that what you call 'em , "stanzas" ?
Nah , I don't care what their
Well then , if I've ever thanked a man , I'll thank you now .
But two men complimenting each other is like two baboons getting together .
The duke will drink under this tree. , He's been looking for you all day , you know .
And I've been avoiding him all day .
He's too argumentative for me .
I think of as many things as he does , but I just thank heaven and don't show off about it .
Come , warble for me .
I wrote a verse to this tune , though it's not very imaginative .
Dear master , I can't go any farther .
Oh , I'm dying of hunger .
I'll lie down here and measure out my grave .
Farewell , kind master .
Hey , what's this , Adam ?
No braver than this ?
Live a little , be comforted a little , cheer up a little .
If I can find any animal in this wild forest , I'll either be food for it or bring it as food for you .
You're not as close to death as you think you are .
I'll be back soon , and if I haven't brought you anything to eat , I will give you permission to die .
But if you die before I return , you'll have made a mockery of my efforts .
There we go !
You look happier already , and I'll be back quickly .
But you're lying out in the cold .
Cheer up , good Adam .
I think he must have turned into an animal , because I can't find him anywhere looking like a man .
My lord , he just left here .
He was happy here , listening to a song .
If that man , who's made up of conflicts , becomes musical , then there must be something wrong with the universe .
Go find him .
Tell him I want to speak with him .
He saved me the trouble : here he comes .
Well , what's going on , mister ?
What kind of life do you lead that your poor friends must beg for your company ?
What , you look amused .
Then he pulled a watch from his bag and , looking at it solemnly , said , "It's ten o'clock .
This way , we can see how the world moves .
Only an hour ago it was nine , and in another hour it will be eleven .
Oh , noble fool !
A worthy fool !
Motley is the only thing to wear .
Who is this fool ?
A worthy fool !
God bless my old master .
He would never have spoken to me like this .
Is that how it's going to be ?
Are you starting to challenge me ?
I'll cure you of your insolence , and I'm not going to give you a thousand crowns , either ! , Hey , Dennis !
Did you call for me , your Worship ?
Wasn't Charles , the duke's wrestler , here to speak with me ?
Yes , sir , he's here at the door right now and asks to see you .
Call him in .
I have a good plan .
Like the wind , I must have the freedom to blast anyone I please , as fools do .
And whoever is most irritated by my foolishness has to laugh the hardest .
Why , sir , must he ?
Well , it's as plain as the beaten path to a parish church .
Dress me up in motley .
Let me speak my mind , and I'll rid the world of its sickness , if it will only tolerate my medicine .
To hell with you !
I know what you'd do .
What would I do besides good ?
You would be committing a wicked sin by chiding other people for sinning , because you yourself have been a terrible sinner , as carnal in your appetites as lust itself , and all the swollen pustules of sin that you acquired in your freedom you now want to burst and shoot back into the world at large .
Who can say I mean just her when all her neighbors are exactly like her ?
And when some lowlife protests that Stop , and eat no more .
But I haven't eaten anything yet .
And you won't until the needy eat .
What kind of fighting cock is this ?
Are you acting so boldly from hardship or because you despise good manners ?
You were right the first time .
But stop , I say .
If you won't listen to reason , I'll have to die .
What would you like ?
Gentlemanly manners have more sway around here than force does .
I'm dying for food , so let me have some .
Sit down and eat , and welcome to our table .
Do you really speak like such a gentleman ?
I beg your pardon .
I thought everything out here was wild , which is why I acted so stern and commanding .
We have in fact seen better days and been summoned to church by the ringing of the holy bell and sat at good men's feasts and cried tears of pity , therefore , sit down and take whatever will satisfy your needs .
Then please , put off your eating for a little while I , like a mother doe , find my fawn and bring it food .
There is a poor old man who , purely out of love , has limped after me for miles .
Thank you , and God bless you for your hospitality .
You see , we're not alone in our unhappiness .
The whole world is a stage , and all the men and women merely actors .
They have their exits and their entrances , and in his lifetime a man will play many parts , his life separated into seven acts .
In the first act he is an infant , whimpering and puking in his nurse's arms .
Then he's the whining schoolboy , with a book bag and a bright , young face , creeping like a snail unwillingly to school .
He's full of wise sayings and up-to-the-minute anecdotes : that's the way he plays his part .
Welcome .
Set the honorable old man down and let him eat .
I thank you very much on his behalf .
Welcome .
Eat .
I won't trouble you yet with questions about your situation. , Some music , please , and , good friend , sing .
Time's not the one in debt .
Your logic is so foolish .
Take it to your master and bring him home immediately .
Every person I meet greets me like an old friend , and every one of them knows my name .
Some of them give me money , some invite me places , some thank me for the kind things I've done for them , some try to sell me things .
Just now a tailor showed me fabrics he bought especially for me and then started to take my measurements .
These are tricks of the imagination , and this place is filled with magicians .
Here's the money you wanted , master .
Who's this Adam you speak of ?
Not the Adam from the garden of Eden , but the Adam from the jailhouse .
I don't know what you're talking about .
No ?
You mean an officer ?
Yes , the leader of the team ; the one that gets you if you can't pay a debt ; the one who assumes people are always going to bed and says to them , "Have arrest." Well , sir , stop your joking there .
Are any ships leaving tonight ?
Can we go ?
Please , somebody , get us out of here !
Good to see you , Master Antipholus .
I see you've met with the jeweler .
Is that chain you're wearing the one you promised to give to me ?
Get away from me , Satan !
Don't try to tempt me !
Master , is this Satan's mistress ?
She's the devil .
No , she's worse : she's the devil's mother , and she comes to us disguised as an easy wench .
But fire also gives off light , and fire will burn you .
You and your servant are very funny , sir .
Will you come with me ?
Can we finish our lunch ?
Master , if you eat with her , bring really long silverware .
Why , Dromio ?
Some Now listen , either give me my ring or give me the necklace .
I hope you're not trying to cheat me .
Come , Dromio , let's go .
Mistress , you know about that .
Antipholus has gone insane , no question about it .
He has a ring of mine , worth forty ducats , and he promised to give me a necklace in exchange for it .
Now he won't give me either .
The reason I think he's insane , besides the way he just acted , is that he told a senseless story over lunch about being locked out of his own house .
His wife probably did it on purpose because she knows what kind of fits he's having .
I must go to his house and tell his wife that he came bursting into my place like a lunatic and stole my ring .
It's my best option : I can't afford to lose forty ducats .
I've spent five years in the remotest parts of Greece and roaming all over Asia .
However , I'll do what I can for you .
I will allow you one day to look for help in Ephesus .
I will .
Don't worry , man , I won't try to escape .
I tell you , this will make her angry when she hears about it .
Here's my servant .
I think he's got the money .
Hello there , sir !
Do you have what I told you to get ?
Yes .
But where's the money ?
Why , sir , I spent it on this rope .
I can get you five hundred ropes for that price .
Why did I just send you home ?
And here I am , with that piece .
And I'll use that piece of rope to welcome you with .
Good sir , calm down .
Hold your tongue .
No , you should tell him to hold his hands !
I wish I were senseless , sir , so that I wouldn't feel your punches !
The only thing you can sense are punches , just like an ass .
I am an ass , indeed : you can tell by my long ears .
I figure that once he's crippled me , I'll beg by showing off my beatings .
That's enough .
My wife's coming .
Mistress , think about your end , beware of your death !
EPHESUS Now what do you think ?
Your husband's mad , isn't he ?
He's trembling in his fit !
I demand this in the name of all the saints in heaven .
Shut up , you doddering old wizard !
I'm not possessed !
Oh , I wish you weren't , you poor , frightened soul .
Listen , hussy , is this man one of your customers ?
Did this fool with the yellow face feast and celebrate in my house today while the guilty doors shut in my face and locked me out of my own house ?
Ate at home ?
You there , rogue , what do you have to say about that ?
I swear , sir , you did not eat at home .
My doors were locked and I was shut out , right ?
By God , your doors were locked and you were shut out .
And she screamed at me , right ?
No lie , she screamed at you .
And her cook yelled , mocked , and teased me , right ?
And I departed in a rage , right ?
You truly did .
Good idea .
I gave it to Dromio , who rushed in for it .
You gave money to me ?
Didn't you go to her for a purse full of ducats ?
He did , and I gave it to him .
And I saw her do it .
I was sent for a rope !
Mistress , both the man and his master are possessed .
I can tell by how pale and deathlike they look .
We must tie them up and leave them in some dark room .
My sweet husband , I did not lock you out .
And my sweet master , I received no gold .
But I agree , sir , that we were locked out .
Keep him away from me !
We need more help !
The devil in him is strong !
jailer , i'm your prisoner .
are you going to let them break me out of jail ?
Gentlemen , let go of him .
He's my prisoner and you can't have him .
Tie up the servant , for he is mad as well .
He's my prisoner .
If I let him go , I'll have to pay his bail fees myself .
I'll pay you .
Take me to the man my husband is in debt to .
What a horrible day !
What a horrible slut !
Master , I'm all tied up for you .
The poor souls , how strangely they talk !
Angelo , the jeweler .
Do you know him ?
I know him .
Two hundred ducats .
For what ?
For a necklace your husband had him make .
He said he was going to buy me a necklace , but I never saw it .
I need to hear the truth about all this .
God have mercy on us !
And they've got their swords unsheathed !
Let's call for help and get them tied up again !
Let's get out of here !
They'll kill us !
It looks like these witches are scared of swords .
The one who claims to be your wife just ran away from you .
I wish we were safely on board our ship already .
Look , let's stay here tonight .
Nobody will hurt us .
You see how kind everyone is to us , how they just hand us gold .
I think this country is so kind that if it weren't for
that mountain of insanity that wants to marry me , I could find it in my heart to stay here and become a witch myself .
I wouldn't stay here tonight for the entire town .
Go and get our stuff onto the ship .
What's this man's reputation like here in the city ?
I'd trust him with everything I own .
You're right .
And that necklace around his neck is the very one he swore he didn't have !
Good sir , stay close to me .
So , tell people that you're from Epidamnum-otherwise all your goods will be confiscated .
Here's the money you asked me to hold .
Dromio , bring this money to the Centaur Inn , where we're lodging , and wait there until I come .
It'll be lunchtime within an hour .
Until then , I'll walk around town , peruse the markets , and gaze upon the buildings , and then I'll return and sleep at the inn .
Get going now .
Many men would take you literally and take off with all this money .
Often , when I'm dulled by worry and melancholy , he lightens my mood with his merry pranks .
Listen , will you walk with me around the town and then dine with me at the inn ?
But if
I got it from you , I never said I didn't .
Yes , you did , sir .
Who heard me do that ?
My own ears heard it , and you know it .
To hell with you !
It's a shame that you walk the streets with all the honest men .
You're a villain to say this about me .
I'll prove that I'm an honest man and a man of honor if you dare defend yourself .
I do dare , and I say that you are the villain .
Run , master , run .
For God's sake , find a house to duck into .
This looks like an abbey .
Go in , or we're done for .
Be quiet , people !
Why have you come here in such a mob ?
To get my poor , mad husband out from inside there .
Let us in so we can tie him up tight and bring him home to recover .
How long has he been possessed like this ?
This week he was sad , moody , and depressed and very different from his usual self .
But it wasn't until this afternoon that he broke out into violence .
That's a sin young men often commit because they allow their eyes to wander .
Which of these bad things happened to him ?
You should have reprimanded him for that .
I did .
Fine , but you weren't harsh enough .
You scolded him in private ?
And in public too .
Fine , but not enough .
He couldn't eat without me talking about it .
All I ever did was tell him how hurtful and bad it was .
And that's why he went crazy .
A jealous woman's poisonous ranting is worse than the bite of a rabid dog .
You seasoned his food with screams .
Fever , as we know , is a kind of madness .
Ruining his meals , his enjoyment , and his sleep would drive any man or beast mad .
What I'm saying is , your jealousy has pushed your husband away from his sanity .
Gentlemen , go in there and grab him .
Then have your servants bring him out .
Healing is part and parcel of my religious vows ; it is a charitable duty my order performs .
Therefore , depart , and leave him here with me .
Be quiet and depart .
You're not going to take him .
Go lodge a complaint about this with the duke .
Come with me .
I'll fall at his feet and lie there until my pleading and crying convinces the duke to come here and force my husband to leave this abbey .
It's almost five o'clock .
To see an elderly , unlucky merchant from Syracuse publicly beheaded for breaking the law and coming here to Ephesus .
Here they come .
We will watch the execution .
Kneel down to the duke before he passes by the abbey .
One more time , we proclaim this publicly : If anyone will pay this man's bail , he will not be put to death .
Duke , the abbess has wronged me and I seek justice .
She's a virtuous and holy lady .
She can't possibly have done you any wrong .
So please , most gracious duke , order her to bring him out so we can get him some help .
And when you married him and made him the master of your bed , I gave you my word that I would do everything I possibly could for him .
Shut up , fool !
Your master and his servant are here .
Mistress , I swear on my life that it's true .
It was just moments ago .
He's crying out for you and swears he'll burn your face and disfigure you if he can get ahold of you .
Oh , my , it's my husband .
Look , he can become invisible .
Just now we put him in the abbey over here , and now he's over there .
In exchange for the blood I shed for you then , I ask you for justice now .
The things she has shamelessly hurled on me are beyond imagination .
Today , great duke , she locked me out of my house and feasted there with whores .
That's terrible !
No , my good lord .
I ate with him and my sister .
Damn my soul if these accusations are true !
If she's lying , I pray that I never sleep again at night or wake up during the day .
Oh , lying woman !
My lord , I know what I'm saying .
He left to fetch a necklace and he promised to bring it to the Porcupine , where I was dining with Balthasar .
He hadn't arrived by the time we finished eating , so I went out looking for him .
I met him in the street , he was there with that man .
On the way , we came across my wife , her sister , and their gang of vile associates .
One of them was a man named Pinch : a hungry , narrow-faced villain ; a skeleton ; a fraud ; a raggedy magician and fortune-teller ; a needy , hollow-eyed , emaciated wretch ; a walking corpse .
He pretended to be some kind of sorcerer , and he gazed in my eyes and took my pulse .
They left me and my servant there , tied together .
He did , my lord .
I never saw the necklace , so help me heaven !
Why , what a complicated case this is !
it pleases you , I'll meet you in the marketplace at five and will keep you company until bedtime .
Right now , my pressing business calls me away .
Farewell till then .
I will go lose myself , wandering up and down throughout the city .
Sir , I leave you to your own contentment .
He leaves me to my own contentment , but that's the one thing I can not find .
Out in the world , I'm like a drop of water , trying to find a drop that matches in the whole wide ocean .
In order to find a mother and a brother , I too have lost myself , unhappily .
How is it that you've come back so soon ?
Back so soon ?
Too late is more like it .
The chicken is burning , the pig is overcooked , the clock has already struck twelve , and my mistress has clocked me one on the cheek .
ate at home , but the jeweler says he didn't .
Sir , he ate with this woman at the Porcupine .
He did , and he snatched my ring right off my finger .
That's true , my lord : I did get this ring from her .
Did you see him enter this abbey ?
As clearly as I see you , my lord .
I think you're all either bewildered or stark raving mad .
Mighty duke , please allow me to say something .
I think I see a friend who will pay my bail and save my life .
I was bound to him an hour ago , sir , but thankfully he chewed through our ropes .
Now I'm Dromio and no longer attached to him .
I'm sure you both remember me .
You're not one of Pinch's patients , are you , sir ?
Why are you looking at me so strangely ?
You know me well .
I never saw you before in my life .
Oh , grief has transformed me since the last time you saw me .
But tell me this : don't you know my voice ?
No .
Don't you , Dromio ?
No sir , trust me , I do not .
You don't know my voice ?
Have you mangled my tongue so badly in these seven short years that my only son can no longer recognize my weak , sorrow-ravaged voice ?
But I still have a little memory left , and there's still some fire in my eyes ; my dull , deaf ears can still hear a little .
All these aging faculties tell me , and I can not be wrong , that you are my son , Antipholus .
I never saw my father in my life .
You know that we parted only seven years ago , in Syracuse .
Your old age and the prospect of death are making you imagine things .
Mighty duke , look here and see a man who's been treated most terribly !
Either my eyes deceive me , or I see two husbands .
I , sir , am Dromio .
Command this man to leave .
I , sir , am Dromio .
Pray , let me stay .
Oh , my old master ! , Who tied him up ?
Tell us , old Egeon : are you the man who once had a wife named Emilia , who gave birth to two fair sons ?
Oh , if you are the same Egeon , speak now , and speak to that same Emilia !
These two Antipholuses , who look so alike , and these two Dromios , who seem to have the same face , and her story of being shipwrecked , why , these two are the parents of these children and have been reunited by accident .
If I'm not dreaming , you are Emilia .
If it's really you , tell me what happened to our son , who floated away with you on that deadly raft .
Antipholus , aren't you originally from Corinth ?
Wait , don't stand next to each other .
I can't tell who's who .
I came from Corinth , Your Highness .
And I came with him .
Your renowned uncle , Duke Menaphon , the famous soldier , brought me here .
Which of you two ate lunch with me today ?
I did , kind lady .
And you're my husband , right ?
That's the necklace I gave you , sir .
I think it is , sir .
I don't deny it .
And you , sir , had me arrested over that necklace .
I think I did , sir .
I don't deny it .
I sent Dromio to you with money for bail , but I don't think he brought it to you .
No , he didn't get any by me .
I got this purse full of money from you , and my Dromio brought it to me .
I want to use this money to set my father free .
That's not necessary .
I'm going to let him live .
Sir , I must get that diamond ring back from you .
There , take it , and thanks for taking such good care of me .
Renowned duke , please join us in the abbey , where we will discuss at length all that has happened to us .
Duke Solinus , my husband , and both my children , and you two Dromios , who marked the day of my sons ' births with your own , come into the abbey with me for a new christening .
After such a long period of grief , we will have such a celebration !
With all my heart , I'll join you .
Dromio , what stuff of mine did you put on a ship ?
The stuff you had at the Centaur , sir .
I'm your master , Dromio .
You have a fat friend at your master's house : she took care of me in the kitchen today , thinking I was you .
I guess now she's going to be my sister-in-law and not my wife .
I think you're my mirror , not my brother .
Do you want to go in and join the party ?
After you , sir .
You're older than me .
That's a good point .
How can we tell which of us is the oldest ?
We'll draw straws .
Meanwhile , after you .
We came into the world as brother and brother , so now let's enter hand in hand , not one before the other .
Hold on a second .
Answer me this , please : where's the money I gave you ?
Oh , the sixpence you gave me last Wednesday to buy leather goods for my mistress ?
The saddle maker has it , sir , I didn't keep it .
I'm not in a joking mood .
Tell me right now and stop fooling : where's the money ?
We're strangers here .
Please , sir ; crack jokes over lunch .
I should think that your appetite would act like a clock ( as mine does ) and bring you home on its own , without the need for a messenger .
That's enough , Dromio , please .
This isn't a good moment for jokes , save them till a happier time .
Where's the gold I gave you ?
Gave me , sir ?
You didn't give me any gold .
Tell me what you've done with the money I entrusted to you .
The only thing that I've been entrusted with was getting you from the market and bringing you to your house , the Phoenix , for lunch .
My mistress and her sister are waiting for you .
Tell me where you've stowed away my money , or I swear I'll break that comical head of yours for goofing when I'm not in the mood .
Where are the thousand
Your mistress's marks ?
What mistress do you have ?
What , are you going to mock me to my face when I told you not to ?
There , take that , you scoundrel !
What are you doing ?
Stop , for God's sake !
Well , if you don't , then I'm out of here .
I swear , somehow the fool has been cheated out of all my money .
They say that this town is full of deception , illusionists that can fool the eye , dark sorcerers who can bewitch your mind , soul-killing witches who can disfigure your body , disguised swindlers , fast-talking fakers , and all kinds of other unchecked sins .
Neither my husband nor the slave has returned , even though I sent the slave off running .
Surely , Luciana , it's already two o'clock .
Maybe some merchant at the marketplace invited him home for lunch .
Sister , let's eat and stop worrying .
A man is master of his own freedom : time is his only master , and when the right moment comes along , he'll come or go as he pleases .
If this is so , be patient , sister .
Why should men be more free than women ?
Because their business lies outside the home .
Why , too much freedom leads to woe .
Therefore , you should obey their wishes .
It's this servantlike mentality that's keeping you unmarried .
No , that's not it , it's because of what happens in the marriage bed .
But if you were married , you'd wield some influence .
Before I learn how to love , I'll learn how to follow orders .
What if your husband strays elsewhere ?
I'd endure it until he came home again .
Now that's patience !
No wonder she's waiting to get married .
When we're faced with a wretched person , bruised and crying with hardship , we try to get them to shush up .
But if you live to see yourself similarly denied your rights , this foolish patience will abandon you .
Well , I'll get married one day , just to see .
Tell me , is your tardy master close at hand ?
Do you know his plans ?
But please , tell me : is he coming home ?
It seems he has taken great care to please his wife .
Why , mistress , my master is as angry as a bull with horns .
You bastard !
I don't mean he's
My mistress , " I said .
Damn your mistress !
My master said it .
I don't know , " he said , "any house , wife , or mistress." My message , which was supposed to be delivered with my mouth , ended up being carried back home by my shoulders .
Go back again , slave , and bring him home .
Go back again , to be beaten home again ?
For God's sake , send somebody else .
Go back , slave , or I'll knock you one across the head .
Get out of here , you blathering peasant !
Bring your master home .
You kick me out , he kicks me back .
Look at you !
You have impatience all over your face .
He feels the need to grace all his other tramps with his presence while I sit at home starving for a smile from him .
Has homely old age taken the alluring beauty from my poor cheeks ?
Have I lost my wit ?
One smile from him would repair my decayed beauty .
But like an unruly deer , he's always trespassing past the park borders and straying away from home to feed in new pastures .
I am nothing but a poor , used fool .
Drive it out of you .
I know his eyes are worshiping some other woman , or why wouldn't he be here ?
Sister , you know he promised to give me a necklace .
I would gladly do without that if he would only stay faithful to me .
Even the best jewel can be tarnished .
And no man with a reputation will tarnish that name with lies and bad behavior .
Since my beauty no longer pleases my husband , I'll weep away what's left and then die with weeping .
How many infatuated people go mad with jealousy !
Give me the death sentence and end all my troubles .
Ever since these deadly conflicts erupted between your violent countrymen and ours , both you Syracusians and we Ephesians have held serious councils and decided not to permit any travel between our two hostile towns .
No-the law goes further : if anyone born in Ephesus is seen in Syracuse's marketplaces or if anyone born in Syracuse comes to Ephesus , that man dies , and his possessions will be confiscated by the Duke , unless he can raise a thousand marks to pay the penalty and ransom himself .
Therefore , by law , you are condemned to die .
The gold I gave Dromio is safe and sound at the Centaur , and the inn host says that Dromio has left and is looking for me .
I haven't spoken to him since I sent him away from the marketplace earlier .
Here he comes .
So , sir .
Are you over your ridiculous mood ?
You never heard of the Centaur ?
You weren't given any gold ?
Your mistress sent for me to come to dinner ?
The Phoenix is my house ?
Were you mad when you spoke to me so madly ?
Said what , sir ?
When did I say all that ?
I haven't seen you since you sent me to the Centaur with the gold you gave me .
And I hope you realized I wasn't very happy about it .
I'm glad to see you in such a merry mood .
But what's the joke ?
Please , master , tell me .
What , are you mocking me to my face ?
Here .
Take that , and that !
Stop , sir , for God's sake !
Now this joke has turned serious .
Why are you doing this ?
Just because I act familiar with you sometimes and let you fool around and joke with me , you try to take advantage of my affection .
You call it my " Don't you know ?
Should I tell you why ?
Well , thank you .
Because you gave me something for nothing .
Next time I'll give you nothing for something .
Is it lunchtime ?
What would that be ?
A basting .
Well , then it will be dry .
If it is , I suggest you don't eat it .
Why not ?
Because it will make you angry , and that will get me another beating .
Well , learn to make jokes at the appropriate time .
There's a time for all things .
Before you got so angry , I never would have thought that .
Why not ?
I'll tell you : it's because of a law as plain as Father Time's bald head .
Let's hear it .
There may be a time for everything , but no man who has gone bald naturally can get his hair back .
Why is Time so cheap about giving out hair ?
But a lot of men have more hair than intelligence .
So then , you must think that hairy men are honest and simpleminded .
Two reasons .
And good ones , too .
Not good ones , please .
Then sure ones .
No , not sure ones when we're talking about something unsure .
Then certain ones .
Name them .
One , so they can save the money they spent on hairstyling , and two , so that when their hair falls out it doesn't land in their dinner .
You were supposed to be proving that there isn't time for everything .
Then I'll change it to this : Father Time himself is bald , so for all time there will be bald men .
There was a time when you'd freely tell me that words were never music to your ear unless I said them , that objects never pleased your eye unless I showed them to you , that touches never pleased your hands unless they were my touches , and that food never tasted sweet to you unless I had prepared it .
How is it , my husband , oh , how is it , that you have become a stranger to yourself ?
Ah , don't tear yourself away from me !
I don't know you .
Why are you treating my sister like this ?
She sent Dromio to bring you home for lunch .
Dromio ?
And this is what you told me he said : that he beat you and pretended his house wasn't his and I wasn't his wife .
Did you talk with this woman ?
What kind of scheme do you have going together ?
Me , sir ?
I never saw her till now .
You said those exact things to me back in the marketplace .
I never talked with her in my life .
What , was I married to her in a dream ?
Or am I asleep now and imagining all this ?
What is making our eyes and ears act so strangely ?
Until I know for sure , I'll humor her .
Dromio , tell the servants to prepare for lunch .
Oh , I wish I had my rosary !
I'll cross myself .
This must be some kind of fairyland .
Oh , spite of spites !
If we don't obey them , they'll suck the life out of us or pinch us black and blue .
Why are you mumbling to yourself instead of answering the order I gave you ?
Dromio , you drone , you snail , you slug , you idiot !
I've been transformed somehow , haven't I , master ?
No , master , I've been changed in both mind and body .
That's true .
I must be as stupid as an ass , that's why I don't know her , but she knows me .
I won't play the fool anymore and just cry while my husband and his man laugh at me .
Come , husband , let's go to lunch .
Husband , I'll eat with you in private today and hear your confession about all the pranks you've pulled .
Am I on earth , in heaven , or in hell ?
know myself !
Master , should I watch the door ?
Yes , and don't let anyone come in , or else I'll break your head .
Well , Syracusian , tell us-briefly-why you left your hometown and came to Ephesus .
And yet I would have made her happy had our luck not been so bad .
In the same hour , and in the same inn , a poor woman also delivered identical twin boys .
Reluctantly , I agreed-alas !
Too quickly , we boarded a ship .
Signior Angelo , please excuse us .
Here's the story we'll tell her : that I was with you at your shop , watching you make her necklace , and that you're going to deliver it tomorrow .
But here comes a scoundrel who says he saw me at the marketplace and that I beat on him , told him I'd given him a thousand marks in gold , and then lied about my wife and my house .
Say what you want , but I know what I know .
I think you're an ass .
Signior Balthasar , you look upset .
Your delicacies aren't worth as much to me as your welcome is .
Good food's not a big deal , everyone can afford that .
And everyone can say "welcome , " which is just a word .
A little food and a huge welcome makes a joyous feast .
Sure , to a cheap host and an even cheaper guest .
But look , even if my dishes are poor , eat them with my best wishes .
You may come across better food , but not a warmer welcome .
What's this ?
My door is locked .
Maud , Bridget , Marian , Ciceley , Gillian , Ginn !
My master is standing out in the street !
Who's in there ?
Hey , open the door !
A reason ?
So I can eat lunch .
I haven't eaten today .
Who do you think you are , keeping me out of my own house ?
You've stolen both my job and my name !
Oh , Lord , this makes me laugh !
I'll come at you with the old proverb : "Should I make myself at home ? "
Listen up , you slave .
Are you going to let us in ?
Come , help me bang on the door , master .
Well done !
We answered them , blow for blow .
You good-for-nothing , let me in .
Master , knock hard upon the door .
If I break the door down , slave , you'll be sorry for this .
Is that you , wife ?
You could have come sooner .
If she punishes you , master , she's sure to punish me .
We argued about which was best , and now we won't get either one .
And if your clothes were as thin as mine , you'd really feel the air .
The food inside is warm , but you're out here freezing .
It would make any man as mad as a bull to be betrayed like this .
Go get me something I can use to break down the door .
I've had enough of this "off with you ! " Come on , let me in !
Well , I'm going to break in .
Go get me a crow .
A crow without feathers ?
Master , do you really mean that ?
I meant a crowbar .
Get going already .
Be patient , sir !
Don't do this !
All this suggests that she has a good reason for doing this to you .
Let's assume that she has a reason , which you don't know yet : have faith that she'll eventually explain why she shut the doors on you today .
You're right , I'll go quietly .
And even though I'm in a distasteful mood , I'll work on being happy .
I know a terrific wench .
We'll eat at her place .
I swear to her that I haven't , but it doesn't change anything .
I'll meet you there in an hour .
Do that .
This little prank of hers is going to cost me .
Is the building of your love already in ruins ?
If you married my sister for her wealth , then for her wealth's sake , treat her with more kindness .
What foolish thief brags about his crimes ?
It's doubly wrong to cheat on your wife and then let her see the offense in your eyes .
We follow in your orbit , and you have the power to move us .
So , my sweet brother-in-law , go inside .
Sweet mistress , I don't know what other name to give you , or how you've figured out mine , you seem as
wise and graceful as the earth is wonderful and divine .
Teach me how I should think and speak .
Why would you have me betray the truth of my emotions and make my love wander in some other direction ?
Are you a god ?
Are you trying to remake me ?
Go ahead , I'll yield to your power .
But if I am myself , then I know for sure that your weeping sister is not my wife .
I don't owe her any duty , it's you that I submit to .
Oh , sweet mermaid , don't command me to drown myself in the flood of your sister's tears .
Are you insane , talking like this ?
Your eyes are playing tricks on you .
That's because you are near me , and you're as dazzling as the sun .
Why are you calling me "love" ?
Call my sister that .
Your sister's sister .
That's my sister .
My food , my fortune , my sweetest hope , my heaven on earth , and my entrance to heaven .
My sister is all those things , or else she should be .
Call yourself your own sister , because I want you .
Give me your hand .
Oh , wait , sir .
Stay here .
I'll go get my sister and see what she thinks .
What's going on , Dromio ?
Where are you running so fast ?
Do you know me ?
Am I Dromio ?
Am I your servant ?
Am I myself ?
It carried us toward Corinth-or so we thought .
But before they reached us-let me say no more !
You are Dromio , you are my servant , and you are yourself .
I'm an ass , I'm a woman's servant , and I'm beside myself .
What woman's servant ?
What do you mean , beside yourself ?
How does she claim to own you ?
I don't mean that she wants me because What's she like ?
The only thing I could do with her is to use all that oil as fuel in a lamp and then use that light to run away by .
Her
Even if she lives till the end of the world , she'd keep burning an additional week .
What's her skin like ?
It's dark , like my shoe .
Some water will fix that .
No , it's permanent .
What's her name ?
Nell .
She's round , like a globe .
What part of her body is Ireland ?
Her bottom .
Honestly , I didn't see it , but I felt it in her hot breath .
Where's America and the West Indies ?
Oh , sir , on her nose , which is covered with pimples , sores , and red welts .
And I think that if I hadn't been brave and strong , she would have turned me into a dog and made me her slave .
If there's enough wind for a ship to sail out tonight , I won't spend tonight in this town .
If a ship's leaving , come to the marketplace .
If everyone here knows us but we don't know anybody , it's time , I think , for us to pack our bags and take off .
I'll run from this woman who claims to be my wife as fast as I'd run from a bear .
That means it's high time for me to go .
That woman who claims I am her husband , I loathe her in my soul .
I'd better stop up my ears against this siren's song .
I know that , sir .
Look , here's the necklace .
What do you want me to do with this ?
Whatever you want , I made it for you .
Made it for me ?
I didn't order it .
You did , not just once or twice , but twenty times .
You're a funny man , sir .
Take care .
I don't know what to think about this .
I'll go wait for Dromio at the marketplace .
If any ships are sailing , I'll get right on one .
Antipholus owes me the exact amount that I owe you .
At five o'clock he's going to pay me for it .
Please , come to his house with me .
The total due is about three ducats more than I owe this gentleman .
Please , pay him immediately .
I don't have the cash right now .
Besides , I have some business to take care of in town .
So you'll bring the necklace to her yourself ?
All right , sir , I will .
Do you have it with you ?
Listen , please , give me the necklace .
The wind is right and it's high tide , and I've delayed him a long time already .
Good Lord !
You're using this as an excuse for not showing up at the Porcupine like you promised .
I should have reprimanded you then for not bringing it , but you started fighting with me first .
It's getting late .
Please , sir , hurry up .
Antipholus , you hear how the man pleads with me .
Give me the necklace !
Give it to my wife , and get your money .
Come , come .
You know I gave it to you just now .
Send the necklace to her , or send me with a token that will authorize her to pay me .
Damn it , this isn't funny .
Where's the necklace ?
Let me see it .
Pay you ?
What should I pay you ?
The money you owe me for the necklace .
I owe you nothing until I receive the necklace .
You know that I gave it to you a half hour ago .
You wrong me even more , sir , by denying it .
Consider how poorly this reflects on me .
I will .
This harms my reputation .
Pay for something I never got ?
Go ahead , you fool .
Arrest me if you dare .
I would have my own brother arrested if he treated me so terribly .
You're under arrest , sir .
You hear the charges .
I'll obey you until I can make bail .
But Angelo , you'll pay for this , even if it costs all the precious metals in your jewelry shop .
Sir , the laws of Ephesus will be on my side , and you'll be embarrassed .
No , keep going , old man ; don't stop like that .
For we may take pity on you , even if we can't pardon you .
Had the gods taken pity on us , I wouldn't be here calling them merciless .
It's been my bad luck to remain alive long enough to be able to tell the sad stories of my own misfortunes .
And for the sake of those you grieve for , do me a favor : tell me the full story of what has happened to you and them , up to this point .
I've left our luggage on the ship , and I bought the oil , balm , and liquor you wanted .
You annoying idiot , what Epidamnum ship is waiting for me ?
A ship you sent me to find , to book passage out of here .
You drunken slave , I sent you for a rope , and I told you what to do with it .
Yeah , right , you sent me to get whipped .
You sent me to the port to find a ship .
I'll debate this with you later , and then I'll teach you to listen more carefully .
Go to Adriana , you scoundrel , and quickly .
Give her this key , and tell her that there's money in the desk that's covered with a Turkish tapestry .
Have her send it to me .
Tell her that I've been arrested and the money will be my bail .
Hurry , you slave !
Go !
To Adriana ?
Where that "sweetheart" said I was her husband !
She's too much for me to handle .
But I must go there , against my will : servants must fulfill their masters ' wishes .
Oh , Luciana , did he tempt you like that ?
Sad or happy ?
First , he said you had no right to him .
He meant he did nothing right for me , which is true , unfortunately .
Then he swore he was a stranger here .
And that's true , he Then I pleaded for you .
And what did he say ?
That he felt for me the love that I begged him to feel for you .
How did he try to persuade you to love him ?
Have some patience , please .
Then why be jealous of a person like that ?
When an evil thing has been lost , no one cries .
Oh , but I think of him more highly than I say I do , and I wish he looked worse in other women's eyes .
My heart adores him , even though my tongue curses him .
How did you lose your breath ?
By running fast .
Where's your master , Dromio ?
Is he all right ?
No , he's in a place worse than hell .
A backbiting friend , one who grabs people , who patrols the streets and passageways .
Speak , man , what's the matter ?
Tell me , who had him arrested ?
I don't know who had him arrested , but the man that arrested him was in a suit of leather .
Get it , sister .
How could he be in debt without me knowing it ?
Don't you hear it ring ?
What , the necklace ?
No , no , the bell .
It's time for me to go .
It was two o'clock when I left him , and now it's one .
I've never heard of that .
Of course .
You sell fish .
No , not me , sir .
In that case I wish you were as good a man as a fish seller .
Good , sir ?
Yes , sir .
Only one man in ten thousand is good in this world .
That's definitely true , my lord .
Since if the sun breeds maggots on a dead dog , kissing the corpse , by the way , do you have a daughter ?
I do indeed , my lord .
Then by all means never let her walk in public .
Procreation is a good thing , but if your daughter gets pregnant , look out , friend .
A lot of words .
And what is the subject ?
Between whom ?
I mean , what do the words say ?
Oh , just lies , sir .
Into my grave .
Well , that's certainly out of this world , all right .
You can't take anything from me that I care less about , except my life , except my life , except my life .
Good-bye , my lord .
You're looking for Lord Hamlet .
He's right over there .
Thank you , sir .
My lord !
My dear sir !
Ah , my good old friends !
How are you , Guildenstern ?
And Rosencrantz !
Boys , how are you both doing ?
Happy that we're not too happy , lucky in being not too lucky .
But you're not down and out , either , are you ?
So you're around Lady Luck's waist ?
Yes , we're the privates in her army .
Anyway , what's up ?
But you're wrong .
Let me ask you a particular question .
What crimes have you committed to be sent here to this prison ?
Prison , my lord ?
Denmark's a prison .
Then I guess the whole world is one .
Yes , quite a large one , with many cells and dungeons , Denmark being one of the worst .
We don't think so , my lord .
Well , then it isn't one to you , since nothing is really good or bad in itself , it's all what a person thinks about it .
And to me , Denmark is a prison .
That must be because you're so ambitious .
It's too small for your large mind .
Dreams are a sign of ambition , since ambition is nothing more than the shadow of a dream .
But a dream itself is just a shadow .
In fact , I consider ambition to be so light and airy that it's only the shadow of a shadow .
Then I guess beggars are the ones with bodies , while ambitious kings and heroes are just the shadows of beggars .
Should we go inside ?
Well , then , I thank you , though I'm such a beggar that even my thanks are not worth much .
Or was it just your whim , on your own initiative ?
What should we say , my lord ?
You were sent for .
I know the king and queen sent for you .
Why would they do that , my lord ?
That's what I want you to tell me .
My lord , we were sent for .
Is something about to happen that warrants working this night and day ?
Who can explain this to me ?
I can .
Or at least I can describe the rumors .
So why did you laugh when I said that men don't interest me ?
The one who plays the part of the king will be particularly welcome .
The adventurous knight will wave around his sword and shield , the lover will be rewarded for his sighs , the crazy character can rant all he wants , the clown will make everybody laugh , and the lady character can say whatever's on her mind , or I'll stop the play .
Which troupe is it ?
The tragic actors from the city , the ones you used to enjoy so much .
What are they doing on the road ?
They made more money and got more attention in the city .
But things have changed there , and it's easier for them on the road now .
Are they as popular as they used to be when I lived in the city ?
Do they attract big audiences ?
No , not like before .
Why ?
Are they getting rusty ?
No , they're busy and as excellent as ever .
The problem is that they have to compete with a group of children who yell out their lines and receive outrageous applause for it .
These child actors are now in fashion , and they've so overtaken the public theaters that society types hardly come at all , they're so afraid of being mocked by the playwrights who write for the boys .
What , you mean kid actors ?
Who takes care of them ?
Who pays their way ?
Will they stop working when their voices mature ?
Aren't the playwrights hurting them by making them upstage adult actors , which they are going to grow up and become ?
There's been a whole debate on the topic .
For a while , no play was sold to the theaters without a big fight between the children's playwright and the actors playing adult roles .
Are you kidding ?
Oh , there's been a lot of quarreling .
And the boys are winning so far ?
Actually , it's not so unusual when you think about it .
My uncle is king of Denmark , and the same people who made fun of him while my father was still alive are now rushing to pay twenty , forty , fifty , a hundred ducats apiece for miniature portraits of him .
There's something downright unnatural about it , if a philosopher stopped to think about it .
The actors are here .
Gentlemen , welcome to Elsinore .
Don't be shy , shake hands with me .
And if we don't shake hands , when I act all nice to the players it will seem like I'm happier to see them than you .
You are very welcome here .
But still , my uncle-father and aunt-mother have got the wrong idea .
In what sense , my lord ?
I'm only crazy sometimes .
At other times , I know what's what .
Gentlemen , I hope you are well .
Listen , Guildenstern , and you too , Rosencrantz , listen as close as you can !
Yes , the second time around , since , as they say , old people become children again .
My lord , I have news for you .
My lord , I have news for you .
When Roscius was an actor in ancient Rome , The actors have arrived , my lord .
Yawn , snore .
I swear , , each actor arrived on his ass .
Well , Aren't I right , Jephthah , old man ?
If you're calling me Jephthah , my lord , I do have a daughter I love more than anything , yes .
What is logical , then , my lord ?
Why ,
Welcome , welcome to all of you .
Which speech , my lord ?
But the critics and I found it to be an excellent play , with well-ordered scenes that were clever but not fancy .
I loved one speech in particular .
This speech is going on too long .
We'll have the barber trim it later , along with your beard .
The muffled queen" ?
That's good .
The muffled queen" is good .
Look how flushed the actor is , with tears in his eyes .
My lord , I will give them all they deserve .
Good heavens , man , give them more than that !
Treat them with honor and dignity .
The less they deserve , the more your generosity is worth .
Lead them inside .
Come , everyone .
Follow him , friends .
We'll watch a whole play tomorrow .
Yes , my lord .
Then we'll see that tomorrow night .
By the way , if I were to compose an extra speech of twelve to sixteen lines and stick it into the play , you could learn it by heart for tomorrow , right ?
Yes , my lord .
Very well .
Follow that gentleman now , and be careful not to make fun of him .
My good friends , I'll see you tomorrow .
Welcome to Elsinore .
Yes , my lord .
Now I'm alone .
Oh , what a mean low-life I am !
For Hecuba !
The ghost is definitely something to worry about .
In the high and mighty Roman Empire , just before the emperor Julius Caesar was assassinated , corpses rose out of their graves and ran through the streets of Rome speaking gibberish .
Wait , look !
It has come again .
I'll meet it if it's the last thing I do .
If you have a voice or can make sounds , speak to me .
Am I a coward ?
Pull off my beard ?
Pinch my nose ?
Call me the worst liar ?
Bloody , inhuman villain !
Remorseless , treacherous , sex-obsessed , unnatural villain !
Ah , revenge !
What an ass I am .
Damn it !
Murder has no tongue , but miraculously it still finds a way to speak .
If he becomes pale , I know what to do .
I need better evidence than the ghost to work with .
The play's the thing to uncover the conscience of the king .
And you can't put your heads together and figure out why he's acting so dazed and confused , ruining his peace and quiet with such dangerous displays of lunacy ?
Did he treat you well when you saw him ?
Yes , in a very gentlemanly way .
He didn't ask questions , but answered ours at length .
Madam , some actors happened to cross our paths on the way here .
They are here at court now , and I believe they've been told to give a performance for him tonight .
It's true , and he asked me to beg you both to attend .
It makes me very happy to hear he's so interested .
Gentlemen , please try to sharpen his interest even more , and let this play do him some good .
We will , my lord .
Yes , I'll go .
I hope so too , Madam .
Ophelia , come here. , I hear him coming .
Quick , let's hide , my lord .
Dying , sleeping , that's all dying is , a sleep that ends all the heartache and shocks that life on earth gives us , that's an achievement to wish for .
To die , to sleep , to sleep , maybe to dream .
That's the consideration that makes us stretch out our sufferings so long .
After all , who would put up with all life's humiliations , the abuse from superiors , the insults of arrogant men , the pangs of unrequited love , the inefficiency of the legal system , the rudeness of people in office , and the mistreatment good people have to take from bad , when you could simply take out your knife and call it quits ?
Who would choose to grunt and sweat through an exhausting life , unless they were afraid of something dreadful after death , the undiscovered country from which no visitor returns , which we wonder about without getting any answers from and which makes us stick to the evils we know rather than rush off to seek the ones we don't ?
But Hello , my lord , how have you been doing lately ?
Very well , thank you .
Well , well , well .
My lord , I have some mementos of yours that I've been meaning to give back to you for a long time now .
Please take them .
There , my lord .
Ha ha , are you good ?
Excuse me ?
Are you beautiful ?
My lord , what are you talking about ?
I'm just saying that if you're good and beautiful , your goodness should have nothing to do with your beauty .
But could beauty be related to anything better than goodness ?
Sure , since beauty's power can more easily change a good girl into a whore than the power of goodness can change a beautiful girl into a virgin .
This used to be a great puzzle , but now I've solved it .
I used to love you .
You certainly made me believe you did , my lord .
I didn't love you .
Then I guess I was misled .
Get yourself to a
I am arrogant , vengeful , ambitious , with more ill will in me than I can fit into my thoughts , and more than I have time to carry it out in .
Why should people like me be crawling around between earth and heaven ?
Every one of us is a criminal .
Don't believe any of us .
Hurry to a convent .
Where's your father ?
He's at home , my lord .
Lock him in , so he can play the fool in his own home only .
Good-bye .
Oh , dear God , please help him !
Get yourself to a convent , at once .
Good-bye .
Good-bye .
Dear God , please make him normal again !
I've heard all about you women and your cosmetics too .
God gives you one face , but you paint another on top of it .
You dance and prance and lisp ; you call God's creations by pet names , and you excuse your sexpot ploys by pleading ignorance .
Come on , I won't stand for it anymore .
It's driven me crazy .
I hereby declare we will have no more marriage .
Whoever is already married ( except one person I know ) will stay married , all but one person .
Everyone else will have to stay single .
Get yourself to a convent , fast .
Love ?
His feelings don't move in that direction .
With any luck , the sea and new countries will push out these thoughts that have somehow taken root in his mind .
What do you think of this plan ?
It should work .
But I still believe that his madness was caused by unrequited love. , Hello , Ophelia .
You don't have to tell us what Lord Hamlet said .
I'll hide and listen in .
If she can't find out what his secret is , then send him off to England or wherever you think best .
That's how we'll do it , then .
If there's any good deed I can do that will bring you peace and me honor , speak to me .
Or if you've got some buried treasure somewhere , which they say often makes ghosts restless , then tell us about it .
Stay and speak !
Keep it from leaving , Marcellus .
Should I strike it with my spear ?
Yes , if it doesn't stand still .
It's over here .
There it is .
It's gone .
It was about to say something when the rooster crowed .
Perform the speech just as I taught you , musically and smoothly .
I hate it when I hear a blustery actor in a wig tear a passion to shreds , bursting everyone's eardrums so as to impress the audience on the lower levels of the playhouse , who for the most part can only appreciate loud noises and pantomime shows .
I would whip a guy for making a tyrant sound too tyrannical .
Please avoid doing that .
I will , sir .
But don't be too tame , either , let your good sense guide you .
I hope we've corrected that fault pretty well in our company , sir .
Oh , correct it completely .
Make sure that the clowns do not ad-lib , since some of them will make certain dumb audience members laugh mindlessly at them , while an important issue in the play needs to be addressed .
Yes , he will , and the queen as well .
Tell the actors to hurry .
Will you two help them get ready ?
Yes , my lord .
Well , hello there , Horatio !
Here I am at your service , my dear lord .
Horatio , you're the best man I've ever known .
Oh , sir , Don't think I'm flattering you .
What could I hope to get from you , who've got nothing but your charm to support you in life ?
Why would anyone flatter a poor person ?
No , keep flattery for kissing the hands of those who can pay well .
You understand ?
Ever since I've been a free agent in my choice of friends , I've chosen you because you take everything life hands you with calm acceptance , grateful for both good and bad .
Watch him closely .
They're coming .
I can't talk now .
Take your seat .
So how's my nephew Hamlet doing ?
Wonderful !
I eat the air , like chameleons do .
I'm positively stuffed with air , I eat so much of it .
I have no idea what you're talking about , Hamlet .
You're not answering my question .
Mine , neither .
Indeed I did , my lord .
What role did you play ?
I played Julius Caesar .
I was killed in the Capitol .
Brutus killed me .
Yes , my lord .
They're ready whenever you are .
No thanks , my good mother .
There's a nicer piece of work right here .
My lady , should I lie in your lap ?
No , my lord .
I mean , with my head in your lap ?
Yes , my lord .
Did you think I was talking about sex ?
What is , my lord ?
Nothing .
You're in a good mood tonight , my lord .
Who , me ?
Yes , my lord .
Oh God , who is , by the way , the best comic of them all .
What can you do but be happy ?
Look how cheerful my mother is , only two hours after my father died .
No , my lord , it's been four months .
As long as that ?
I'll get myself a fur-trimmed suit .
In that case , there's reason to hope a man's memory may outlive him by six months .
But he's got to build churches for that to happen , my lady , or else he'll have to put up with being forgotten , like the hobby-horse in the popular song that goes , "Heigh-ho , heigh-ho , the hobby-horse is forgotten." What does this mean , my lord ?
This means we're having some mischievous fun .
This pantomime was probably a summary of the play .
This guy will tell us everything .
Actors can't keep a secret .
They'll tell all .
Will he tell us what that pantomime meant ?
Sure , or anything else you show him .
As long as you aren't ashamed to show it , he won't be ashamed to tell you what it means .
You're naughty .
I'm watching the play .
Was that the prologue or the inscription on some wedding ring ?
It was a bit short , my lord .
Yes , as short as a woman's love .
Madam , how are you liking this play ?
The lady's overdoing it , I think .
Oh , but she'll keep her word .
Is there anything offensive in it ?
Not offensive at all .
What's the play called ?
Yes , it faded away when the rooster crowed .
Don't you agree that we owe it to him to tell him about this , out of duty and love ?
I could even supply the dialogue between you and your lover if you did your little puppet show of love for me .
We're all waiting for the revenge !
The original story was written in the finest Italian .
You'll see shortly how the murderer wins the love of Gonzago's wife .
The king is getting up .
What , is he scared of a gun that only fired a blank ?
My lord , how are you feeling ?
Get me out of here !
Lights , lights , get us some lights !
No , a whole share for me .
Did you notice ?
Yes , I did , my lord .
When the actors were talking about poison ?
I watched him very closely .
Ah ha !
Hey , let's have some music here !
Play your flutes !
Come on , music !
My lord , could I have a word with you ?
You can have a whole story , not just a word .
Sir , the king , Yes , what about him ?
He's in his chambers now , and he's extremely upset .
I'll be good , sir .
Go ahead .
The queen your mother is upset , and sent me to see you .
It's lovely to see you .
No , my lord , your polite words are not to the point .
If you could please stop fooling around , I'll tell you what your mother wants .
If not , I'll leave you alone and that'll be the end of my business .
Sir , I can't .
Can't what , my lord ?
Stop fooling around .
My mind is confused .
Okay , to the point .
Oh , what a wonderful son , I can impress my mother !
But what's the upshot of her admiration ?
Do tell .
She wants to have a word with you in her bedroom before you go to bed .
I'd obey even if she were my mother ten times over .
Is there anything else I can do for you ?
My lord , you used to like me .
And still do , I swear by my hands .
My lord , what's wrong with you ?
Sir , I have no future ahead of me .
But how can you say that , when the king himself says you're the heir to the Danish throne ?
I don't really understand what you mean .
Will you play this recorder ?
I can't , my lord .
Please .
I'm serious , I can't .
I'm begging you .
I have no idea how .
Oh , it's as easy as lying .
But I can't play a melody .
I don't know how .
My God , do you think I'm easier to manipulate than a pipe ?
You can push my buttons , but you can't play me for a fool .
Hello and God bless you , sir .
My lord , the queen wants to speak with you right away .
Do you see that cloud up there that looks like a camel ?
By God , it does look like a camel .
To me it looks like a weasel .
It does have a back like a weasel's .
Or like a whale .
Yes , very much like a whale .
I'll go see my mother soon .
I'll tell her .
This is the time of night when witches come out , when graveyards yawn open and the stench of hell seeps out .
I could drink hot blood and do such terrible deeds that people would tremble even in the daylight .
I'll speak as sharp as a dagger to her , but I won't use one on her .
And so , my words and thoughts will be at odds .
I don't like the way he's acting , and it's not safe for me to let his insanity get out of control .
So get prepared .
I'm sending you to England on diplomatic business , and Hamlet will go with you .
As king , I can not risk the danger he represents as he grows crazier by the hour .
We'll take care of it .
When a great leader dies he doesn't die alone but , like a whirlpool , draws others with him .
He's like a huge wheel on the top of the highest mountain whose spokes touch the rim of ten thousand smaller things , when it falls down the mountain , every little object goes down with it .
Whenever a king sighs , everyone groans .
Prepare yourself , please , for this trip .
We'll put a leash on this danger that's now running wild .
We'll hurry .
My lord , Hamlet's going to his mother's room .
I'll hide behind the tapestry to hear what they say .
I bet she'll chew him out .
And as you said ( and you said it wisely ) , it's good to have someone other than a mother listening in on them , since she can be too partial to him .
Goodbye , my lord .
I'll stop by before you go to bed , and tell you what I've heard .
Thanks , my dear lord .
It has the mark of
So much for Fortinbras .
That won't work , since I'm still reaping the rewards of that murder : my crown and my queen .
Can a person be forgiven and still keep the fruits of his crime ?
In this wicked world , criminals often take the money they stole and use it to buy off the law , shoving justice aside .
But not in heaven .
What is there left to do ?
But it can't help either !
My heart's as black as death .
My soul is stuck to sin , and the more it struggles to break free , the more it sticks .
Help me , angels !
C'mon , make an effort .
I could do it easily now .
He's praying now .
And now I'll do it .
He'll come right away .
I'll be right here , silent .
Have you forgotten who I am ?
No , sit down .
What are you going to do ?
You won't kill me , will you ?
Repent and avoid damnation .
Good night to you .
Who would do that ?
What is it , Laertes ?
What would you like , Laertes ?
Please , let me go .
I have to go to England , don't you know that ?
What , Gertrude ?
How is Hamlet ?
Oh , this is terrible !
His wildness is a threat to all of us , to you , to me , to everyone .
I've gotten it dirty , ashes to ashes , and dust to dust .
Believe what ?
Besides , you're a sponge !
You think I'm a sponge , my lord ?
I'm glad about that .
A thing of no importance .
How dangerous to have this madman on the loose !
But a terminal disease requires extreme treatment , or nothing at all .
But where is he ?
Bring him to me .
At dinner .
What do you mean by that ?
Where is Polonius ?
In heaven .
So get ready to leave .
Good .
Don't waste any time .
I'll tell him , my lord .
Go ahead , then .
Is he attacking the heartland of Poland or some frontier ?
In the end I grudgingly consented .
I hereby grant your request , and hope you have a good time .
So why does it seem so particular to you ?
So then the Poles won't be willing to defend it .
Good-bye , sir .
Start without me .
My God !
I have the motivation , the willpower , the ability , and the means to do it .
I won't speak to her .
She's insistent .
In fact , she's crazed .
What does she want ?
Show her in .
Please just listen .
Oh , ho !
May God be at your table .
Come , driver !
Good night , ladies , good night , sweet ladies , good night , good night .
Follow her .
Listen !
What is it ?
Where's this so-called king ?
Please wait .
Thank you .
Let him go , Gertrude .
Where's my father ?
He's dead .
Don't mess with me .
Only my free will , nothing else .
Do you want to know who they are , then ?
What's that noise ?
Please remember , love .
It's not manly .
And you're right to do so .
Please , come with me .
Who are the people who want to speak with me ?
Sailors , sir .
They say they have letters for you .
Show them in .
Hello , sir .
God bless you .
May He bless you , too .
He will , sir , if He wants to .
I have a lot to tell you about them .
Good-bye .
It looks that way .
I didn't see them .
Laertes , I want you to hear what they say .
What does this mean ?
Do you recognize the handwriting ?
Naked , " he says .
And in a P.S .
But let him come .
That'll be fine .
All your talents and gifts didn't arouse as much envy from him as this one quality did , though to me it's far from your best attribute .
What quality is that , my lord ?
Yes , from Normandy .
Yes , that's the one .
I know him well .
He's his homeland's jewel .
How could you ask ?
That's the right answer , it shows your love .
Let's go .
Damn it !
But wait , what's that sound ?
Drowned ?
So she is drowned .
Let's follow him , Gertrude .
Let's follow him .
Here's the water , right ?
Is that how the law sees it ?
It sure is .
The coroner's inquest law .
Do you want to know the truth ?
Well there , now you've said it .
Come on , shovel .
They keep up Adam's profession .
What , aren't you a Christian ?
I'll ask you another question .
If you can't answer it , Go ahead !
But how ?
Ah , I've got it !
Go ahead .
Now go and get me some booze .
Yes , exactly .
Indeed , my lord .
Exactly .
There's another .
Could that be a lawyer's skull ?
No more than that , my lord .
Yes , my lord , and calfskin too .
It's mine , sir .
For no man , sir .
How literal this guy is !
You don't know that ?
He'll recover his sanity there .
Why not ?
What do you mean , "in a strange way" ?
On what grounds ?
How long will a man lie in his grave before he starts to rot ?
A leathermaker will last nine years .
Whose was it ?
A crazy bastard .
Who do you think ?
I really don't know .
Damn that crazy madman !
This one ?
Yes , that one .
Are you sad about that ?
Horatio , tell me something .
Oh God , do I have to remember that ?
She would hang on to him , and the more she was with him the more she wanted to be with him ; she couldn't get enough of him .
Less than a month after my father's death , even before the tears on her cheeks had dried , she remarried .
That's not good , and no good can come of it either .
Hello , sir .
Nice to see you again , Horatio , that is your name , right ?
That's me , sir .
I'll change that name for you .
Hello , sir .
What's that , my lord ?
Do you think Alexander the Great looked like this when he was buried ?
Exactly like that .
And smelled like that , too ?
Whew !
Just as bad , my lord .
How low we can fall , Horatio .
Isn't it possible to imagine that the noble ashes of Alexander the Great could end up plugging a hole in a barrel ?
If you thought that you'd be thinking too much .
No , not at all .
The great emperor Caesar , dead and turned to clay , might plug up a hole to keep the wind away .
Oh , to think that the same body that once ruled the world could now patch up a wall !
But quiet , be quiet a minute .
Here comes the king , the queen , and the noblemen of court .
Who are they following ?
Let's stay and watch a while .
What other rites are you going to give her ?
She deserves to have rocks and stones thrown on her body .
But she has had prayers read for her and is dressed up like a pure virgin , with flowers tossed on her grave and the bell tolling for her .
Isn't there any other rite you can perform ?
No , nothing .
We would profane the other dead souls here if we sang the same requiem for her that we sang for them .
Lay her in the ground , and let violets bloom from her lovely and pure flesh !
I'm telling you , you jerk priest , my sister will be an angel in heaven while you're howling in hell .
Sweet flowers for a sweet girl .
Goodbye !
Oh , damn three times , damn ten times the evil man whose wicked deed deprived you of your ingenious mind .
Hold off burying her until I've caught her in my arms once more .
That's no way to pray .
Pull them apart .
Oh , my son , what issue is that ?
I loved Ophelia .
Forty thousand brothers , if you added all their love together , couldn't match mine .
What are you going to do for her ?
Oh , he's crazy , Laertes !
For the love of God , be patient with him .
Damn it , show me what you're going to do for her .
Will you cry ?
Fight ?
Stop eating ?
Cut yourself ?
I'll do all that .
And if you rattle on about mountains , then let them throw millions of acres over us .
This is pure insanity .
He'll be like this for a little while .
Then he'll be as calm and quiet as a dove waiting for her eggs to hatch .
I always loved you .
But it doesn't matter .
Please , Horatio , go with him .
Who's there ?
No , who are Long live the king !
Is that Barnardo ?
Yes , it's me .
You've come right on time .
The clock's just striking twelve .
Go home to bed , Francisco .
Thanks for letting me go .
It's bitterly cold out , and I'm depressed .
Has it been a quiet night ?
I haven't even heard a mouse squeak .
Well , good night .
If you happen to see Horatio and Marcellus , who are supposed to stand guard with me tonight , tell them to hurry .
I think I hear them .
That's enough about that .
Now I'll tell you the other story about my journey .
Do you remember the circumstances ?
How could I forget , my lord !
There was a kind of war in my brain that wouldn't let me sleep .
It was worse than being a captive in chains .
Is it possible ?
Yes , please tell me .
Do you want to know what I wrote ?
Yes , my lord .
I had my father's signet ring in my pocket , with the royal seal of Denmark on it .
I folded up the new document , signed it , sealed it , and put it safely back so that no one noticed any difference .
The next day we had our fight at sea , and you know what happened after that .
So Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are in for it .
Man , they were asking for it .
I don't feel guilty about them at all .
They got what they deserved .
It's always dangerous when little people get caught in the crossfire of mighty opponents .
What a king Claudius is !
Isn't it completely moral to kill him now with this sword , and an easy conscience ?
And wouldn't I be damned if I let this monster live to do more harm ?
He'll find out soon what happened in England .
Soon enough .
But I have the meantime .
I'll be nice to him .
It was just that the showiness of his grief sent me into a fury .
Hang on a minute , who are you ?
Welcome back to Denmark , my lord .
Thank you kindly , sir .
My lord , if you have a free moment , I have a message from His Majesty .
No thank you , my lord .
It's very hot .
It is rather cold , indeed , my lord .
And yet I feel it's very hot and humid , which is bad for my complexion .
Yes indeed it is , sir .
Very humid , I can't tell you how humid it is .
My lord , His Majesty wanted me to tell you that he's placed a large bet on you .
This is what it's all about , Please , I beg you , No , my lord , I'm comfortable like this , thank you .
Sir , your description of him doesn't detract from his good qualities , though I know that trying to list them all would make your head spin , and even so you wouldn't be able to keep up with him .
I felt like skipping school , sir .
I wouldn't allow your enemies to say that , and I won't believe it from you .
I know you'd never skip school .
What are you doing here in Elsinore ?
I'll teach you to drink hard by the time you leave .
Sir , we came to see your father's funeral .
Please , don't make fun of me .
I think you came to see my mother's wedding instead .
Well , sir , it's true it came soon after .
The leftovers from the funeral dinner made a convenient wedding banquet .
Oh , I'd rather have met my fiercest enemy in heaven , Horatio , than have lived through that terrible day !
My father , I think I see my father .
Where , sir ?
In my imagination , Horatio .
I saw him once .
He was an admirable king .
He was a great human being .
He was perfect in everything .
I'll never see the likes of him again .
You speak absolutely correctly , sir .
And what's the point , sir ?
Why are we talking about him like this ?
Sorry , sir ?
I know you know something , Thanks for the compliment , I'm happy you know that .
But in fact it doesn't say much .
I'm sorry , you were saying ?
I know you know something about how excellent Laertes is ,
I can't admit that , since you'd have to compare his excellence to mine .
Excellent in fencing , I mean , sir .
The rapier and the dagger .
Those are only two of his weapons .
But , go on .
The king has bet six Barbary horses , and he has prepared six French rapiers and daggers with all their accessories .
Three of the carriages are very imaginatively designed , and they match the fencing accessories .
What do you mean by "carriages" ?
The carriages , sir , are the hangers , where the swords hang .
Carriage" makes it sound like it's pulling around a cannon .
I prefer to call it a "hanger." But anyway .
Six Barbary horses , six French swords with accessories , and three imaginatively designed carriages , sounds like a French bet against the Danish .
Why has all this been put on the table ?
The king , sir , has bet that in a dozen rounds between you and Laertes , he won't beat you by more than three hits .
But what if my answer's no ?
It's my exercise time .
My services are at your command .
Thank you .
It's a good thing he's here to recommend himself .
No one else would .
He used to praise his mother's nipple before he sucked it .
The king wishes to know if you want to play against him right away , or wait awhile .
I'll do whatever the king wants .
If he's ready now , so am I .
Otherwise , I'll do it anytime , as long as I'm able .
The king and queen are coming down with everyone else .
Right on cue .
The queen wants you to chat with Laertes , politely , before you begin your match .
She's full of good advice .
You're going to lose this bet , my lord .
I don't think so .
I've been practicing fencing constantly since he went off to France .
With the handicap they've given me , I think I'll win .
But I have a sinking feeling anyway .
Oh well .
I'll say you're not feeling well .
You'll do no such thing .
I thumb my nose at superstitions .
What's important is to be prepared .
Since nobody knows anything about what he leaves behind , then what does it mean to leave early ?
Let it be .
Come shake hands with Laertes , Hamlet .
I will accept no apology until experts in matters of honor show me how to make peace with you without staining my own reputation in doing so .
Yes , hand me one too .
I'm going to make you look sharp , Laertes .
You're making fun of me .
No , I swear I'm not .
Yes , my lord , quite well .
You've bet on the weaker fencer .
I've seen both of you fence .
But since Laertes is better , we've given him a handicap .
Yes , my lord .
Put the goblets of wine on that table .
If Hamlet makes the first or second hit , or gets back at Laertes by making the third hit , then let my soldiers give him a military salute .
I'll drink to Hamlet's health , and into his goblet I'll drop a pearl even more costly than those in the crowns of the last four Danish kings .
Give me the goblets .
Come on , sir .
Come on , my lord .
That was one hit .
No , it wasn't .
Referee !
It was obviously a hit .
Well , let's go on .
Give me a goblet. , Hamlet , this pearl's yours .
Here's to your health .
Give him the goblet .
Set it down awhile .
Let's play .
Another hit .
What do you say ?
You got me , I admit it .
My son will win .
He's flabby and out of breath. , Here , Hamlet , take my handkerchief and wipe your forehead .
The queen drinks to your good luck and happiness , Hamlet .
Thank you , madam .
Gertrude , don't drink that .
Excuse me .
I'll drink it if I like .
I'd better not drink now .
I'll drink later .
Come on , let me wipe your face .
I doubt it .
Get ready for the third hit , Laertes .
You're just playing around .
Come on , give me your best shot .
I sense you're treating me like a child .
You think so ?
Come on .
Take this !
Separate them .
They're overdoing it .
No , come on , one more time .
Take care of the queen !
Both fencers are bleeding , how do you feel , my lord ?
How do you feel , Laertes ?
Like a mouse caught in my own trap , Osric .
How's the queen ?
She fainted at the sight of them bleeding .
The drink , the drink !
I've been poisoned .
Oh , what evil !
Lock the door .
We've been betrayed !
Find out who did it !
I'm the one , Hamlet .
Hamlet , you're dead .
No medicine in the world can cure you .
You don't have more than half an hour to live .
The treacherous weapon is right in your hand , sharp and dipped in poison .
The foul plan backfired on me .
Here I lie and will never get up again .
Your mother's been poisoned .
I can't speak anymore .
The king , the king's to blame .
Then get to work , poison !
Sir , I think I saw him last night .
Saw who ?
The king my father ? !
Just listen carefully while I tell you the amazing thing I saw , with these gentlemen as witnesses .
For God's sake , let me hear it .
After midnight , for two nights running , these two guards , Marcellus and Barnardo , saw a figure that looked very much like your father , in full armor from head to toe .
It just appeared before them and marched past them with slow dignity three times , a staff's distance from their amazed eyes , while they turned , quaking with fear and too shocked to speak .
I knew your father .
But where did this happen ?
Treason !
Treason !
Protect me , my friends .
I've only been hurt , not killed .
Here , you goddamn incest-breeding Danish murderer , drink this .
Is your little pearl in there ?
Follow my mother .
He got what he deserved .
He mixed that poison himself .
Please forgive me as I forgive you , Hamlet .
You're not responsible for my death and my father's , and I'm not responsible for yours .
God will free you from blame .
You're alive .
Not for a second .
I'm more like an ancient Roman than a corrupt modern Dane .
Some of this liquor's still left in the goblet .
Please , give me that goblet , if you love me .
Let go of it !
I'll get it from you , I swear .
Oh God , Horatio , what a damaged reputation I'm leaving behind me , as no one knows the truth .
If you ever loved me , then please postpone the sweet relief of death awhile , and stay in this harsh world long enough to tell my story .
What are these warlike noises ?
Young Fortinbras , returning in triumph from Poland , is firing his guns to greet the English ambassadors .
Oh , I'm dying , Horatio !
This strong poison's overpowering me .
I will not live to hear the news from England .
But I bet Fortinbras will win the election to the Danish crown .
He's got my vote as I die .
Oh , oh , oh , oh .
What do I see here ?
What would you like to see ?
These corpses suggest mayhem .
Oh , proud Death , what banquet are you preparing that you've needed to knock off so many princes at one stroke ?
This is a horrible sight .
We meant to tell the king that his orders have been carried out , and Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are dead .
Who will thank us now ?
As for me , I welcome my good luck with sadness .
Let four captains carry Hamlet like a soldier onto the stage .
Military music and military rites will speak for his heroic qualities .
Pick up the corpses .
On the platform where we stand guard , sir .
Didn't you talk to it ?
I did , sir , but it didn't answer me .
That's very strange .
I swear to God it's true , sir .
We thought you ought to know about it .
Yes , I should know , but it disturbs me .
Are you on duty again tonight ?
Yes , sir .
It was armed , you say ?
Armed , sir .
From head to toe ?
Yes , from top to bottom , sir .
So you couldn't see his face , then ?
Oh , yes , we could , sir .
He had his helmet visor up .
Was he pale or flushed and red-faced ?
Very pale , sir .
Did he stare at you ?
The whole time .
I wish I'd been there .
Did it stay a long time ?
About as long as it would take someone to count slowly to a hundred .
No , longer than that .
Not the time I saw it .
His beard was gray , right ?
It was just like in real life , dark brown with silver whiskers in it .
I'll stand guard with you tonight .
Maybe it'll come again .
I bet it will .
If it looks like my good father , I'll speak to it , even if Hell itself opens up and tells me to be quiet .
I ask you , if you've kept this a secret , keep doing so .
Whatever happens tonight , don't talk about it .
I'll return the favor .
So good-bye for now .
I'll see you on the guards ' platform between eleven and twelve tonight .
We'll do our duty to you , sir .
Give me your love instead , as I give you mine .
Good-bye .
My father's ghost , armed !
Something's wrong .
I suspect some foul play .
I wish the night were here already !
Until then , I have to remain calm .
Bad deeds will be revealed , no matter how people try to hide them .
My belongings are on the ship already .
Good-bye .
And , my dear sister , as long as the winds are blowing and ships are sailing , let me hear from you , write .
Do you doubt I'll write ?
As for Hamlet and his attentions to you , just consider it a big flirtation , the temporary phase of a hot-blooded youth .
It won't last .
Not a second more .
No more than a minute ?
Then think about how shameful it would be for you to give in to his seductive talk and surrender your treasure chest to his greedy hands .
Watch out , Ophelia .
Just keep your love under control , and don't let yourself become a target of his lust .
Baby blooms are most susceptible to disease .
So be careful .
Fear will keep you safe .
Young people often lose their self-control even without any help from others .
I'll keep your words of wisdom close to my heart .
Don't worry , I won't .
I've been here too long .
And here comes father .
You're still here ?
Shame on you , get on board !
The wind is filling your ship's sail , and they're waiting for you .
Here , I give you my blessing again .
And just try to remember a few rules of life .
Don't say what you're thinking , and don't be too quick to act on what you think .
Be friendly to people but don't overdo it .
Don't be quick to pick a fight , but once you're in one , hold your own .
Listen to many people , but talk to few .
Hear everyone's opinion , but reserve your judgment .
Good-bye , son .
Your servants are waiting .
It's locked away in my memory , and you've got the key .
Good-bye .
What did he tell you , Ophelia ?
Something about Hamlet .
If things are the way people tell me they are , and they're only telling me this to warn me , then I have to say , you're not conducting yourself with the self-restraint a daughter of mine should show .
What's going on between you two ?
Tell me the truth .
He's offered me a lot of affection lately .
Affection ! " That's nothing !
You're talking like some innocent girl who doesn't understand the ways of the world .
Do you believe his "offers , " as you call them ?
I don't know what to believe , father .
Then I'll tell you .
Believe that you are a foolish little baby for believing these "offers" are something real .
Offer yourself more respect , or , not to beat this word to death , you'll offer me the chance to be a laughing-stock .
Go on .
And he's made the holiest vows to me , to back up what he says .
These vows are just traps for stupid birds .
I know when a man is on fire , he'll swear anything .
Remember that Hamlet is young and has a lot more freedom to fool around than you do .
Do as I say .
Now come along .
I'll do as you say , father .
Friends of this country .
And servants of the Danish king .
Good night to you both .
Good-bye .
Who's taken over the watch for you ?
Barnardo's taken my place .
Good night .
Is Horatio here too ?
More or less .
So , tell us , did you see that thing again tonight ?
I haven't seen anything .
Horatio says we're imagining it , and won't let himself believe anything about this horrible thing that we've seen twice now .
That's why I've begged him to come on our shift tonight , so that if the ghost appears he can see what we see and speak to it .
Yes , it's definitely nippy .
What time is it ?
A little before twelve , I think .
No , it's just after twelve ; I heard the clock strike .
Really ?
I didn't hear it .
So it's nearly the time when the ghost likes to appear .
What does that mean , sir ?
Is that a tradition ?
Yes , it is .
But though I was born here and should consider that tradition part of my own heritage , I think it would be better to ignore it than practice it .
Other countries criticize us for our loud partying .
They call us drunks and insult our noble titles .
And our drunkenness does detract from our achievements , as great as they are , and lessens our reputations .
A tiny spot of evil casts doubt on their good qualities and ruins their reputations .
Look , sir , here it comes !
Oh angels , protect us !
Whether you're a good spirit or a cursed demon , whether you bring heavenly breezes or blasts of hell fire , whether your intentions are good or evil , you look so strange I want to talk to you .
I'll call you "Hamlet Senior , " "King , " "Father , " "royal Dane." Answer me !
Don't drive me crazy with curiosity , but tell me why your church-buried bones have burst out of their coffin , and why your tomb ,
where we quietly buried you , has opened up its heavy marble jaws to spit you out again .
Why ?
It wants you to go off with it , as if it wants to tell you something alone .
Look how politely it's pointing you to a place that's farther away .
But don't go .
Definitely not .
Don't do it , sir .
Why , what's the danger ?
And as for my soul , how can the ghost endanger that , since it's as immortal as the ghost is ?
Look , it's waving me over again .
I'll follow it .
where it takes on some other horrible form that drives you insane .
Think about it .
It's still waving to me .
You're not going , sir .
Let go of me .
Calm down .
You're not going anywhere .
Let me go , gentlemen .
I swear , if anyone holds me back , I'll make a ghost of him !
His imagination is making him crazy .
Let's follow them .
It's not right to obey his orders to let him go alone .
No , let's follow him .
Where are you taking me ?
Speak .
Listen to me .
I will .
The hour has almost come when I have to return to the horrible flames of purgatory .
Ah , poor ghost !
Speak .
I'm ready to hear you .
You must be ready for revenge , too , when you hear me out .
What ?
I'm the ghost of your father , doomed for a certain period of time to walk the earth at night , while during the day I'm trapped in the fires of purgatory until I've done penance for my past sins .
If I weren't forbidden to tell you the secrets of
make your eyes jump out of their sockets , and your hair stand on end like porcupine quills .
But mortals like you aren't allowed to hear this description of the afterlife .
Listen , listen !
If you ever loved your poor dear father , Oh God !
Take revenge for his horrible murder , that crime against nature .
Murder ?
His most horrible murder .
Murder's always horrible , but this one was especially horrible , weird , and unnatural .
You'd have to be as lazy as a weed on the shores of I knew it !
My uncle ?
Oh , Hamlet , how far she fell !
She went from me , who loved her with the dignity and devotion that suits a legitimate marriage , to a wretch whose natural gifts were poor compared to mine .
So let me be brief here .
And that's how my brother robbed me of my life , my crown , and my queen all at once .
Oh , it's horrible , horrible , so horrible !
If you are human , don't stand for it .
Don't let the Danish king's bed be a nest of incest .
Leave her to God and her own guilt .
Now , good-bye .
The glowworm's light is beginning to fade , so morning is near .
Good-bye , good-bye , good-bye .
Remember me .
Ah , all you up in heaven !
And earth !
What else ?
Shall I include hell as well ?
Damn it !
Keep beating , my heart , and muscles , don't grow old yet , keep me standing .
Remember you !
Yes , you poor ghost , as long as I have any power of memory in this distracted head .
Remember you !
Yes , I'll wipe my mind clean of all trivial facts and memories and preserve only your commandment there .
Yes , by God !
Oh , you evil woman !
Oh , you villain , villain , you damned , smiling villain !
Where's my notebook ? , It's a good idea for me to write down that one can smile and smile , and be a villain .
At least it's possible in Denmark .
He said , "Remember me." I swore I would .
Sir , sir !
Lord Hamlet. , Please let him be all right !
I'm all right .
Oh-ho-ho , sir !
Oh-ho-ho , kid !
Come here .
So how did it go , sir ?
What happened , sir ?
It was incredible !
Oh , please , tell us , sir .
I swear I won't , sir .
I won't either , sir .
Okay .
But you promise you can keep a secret ?
Yes , I swear .
Sit down for a while , and we'll tell you again the story you don't want to believe , about what we've seen two nights now .
Well , let's sit down and listen to Barnardo tell us .
Last night , when that star to the west of the North Star had traveled across the night sky to that point where it's shining now , at one o'clock , Marcellus and I , Quiet , shut up !
It's come again .
Looking just like the dead king .
Very much so .
It's terrifying .
It wants us to speak to it .
Ask it something , Horatio .
By God , I order you to speak .
Any villain in Denmark is going to be , well , a villain .
You don't need a ghost returning from the grave to tell you that , sir .
Yes , you're absolutely right .
So , without further ado , the best thing to do now is probably just to shake hands and go our separate ways .
You go and take care of your business ( since everybody has some business to take care of , whatever it is worth ) , and I'll go and pray .
You're talking in such a crazy way , sir .
No offense taken .
Ah , but there is , Horatio , there's a lot of offense .
As for this ghost we just saw , he's a real one , I can tell you that much .
But regarding what happened between us , don't ask , I can't tell you .
And now , my friends , my courageous and educated friends , do me one small favor .
What is it , sir ?
Of course we will .
Don't ever tell anyone what you've seen tonight .
We won't , sir .
No , you have to swear it .
I swear to God I won't .
Me too , I won't , I swear to God .
Swear by my sword .
But we already swore , sir .
Yes , but swear by my sword this time .
Agree to swear .
You swear never to mention what you've seen .
Swear by my sword .
Come over here , gentlemen , and put your hands on my sword again .
Swear by my sword you'll never mention what you've heard .
You said it right , old mole .
What a tunneler !
Let's move again , my friends .
My God , this is unbelievably strange .
Then give it a nice welcome , as you would give to any stranger .
There are more things in heaven and earth , Horatio , than you've even dreamed of .
Swear you won't .
Let's go back to court together , but
Give him this money and these letters , Reynaldo .
I will , sir .
It would be wonderfully wise of you , my dear Reynaldo , to ask around about his behavior a little before you visit him .
That's what I thought too , sir .
Excellent , very good .
Do you get what I'm saying , Reynaldo ?
Yes , very well , sir .
You should say , "I sort of know him , but not well .
Isn't he the one who's always , " and so on .
Like gambling , sir ?
That's right , or drinking , swearing , fist-fighting , visiting prostitutes , that kind of thing .
But that would ruin his reputation !
Oh no , not if you say it right .
But , sir , Why should you do this , you want to know ?
Yes , sir .
I'd like to know .
Yes , sir .
And then he'll , he'll , wait , what was I about to say ?
Good God , I was about to say something .
What was I saying ?
I just saw him yesterday , " or "the other day , " or whenever it is , you know , "and there he was gambling , " or "there he was , totally wasted , or fighting with somebody about a tennis match , or going into a house of ill repute" , that means a whorehouse , you know , or whatever .
You get my point , don't you ?
Yes , I do , sir .
God bless you .
Have a safe trip .
Thank you , sir .
I will , sir .
And I hope he's studying his music like he's supposed to .
Got it , sir .
Good-bye .
From what , in God's name ?
Is he crazy with love for you ?
What did he say ?
He stayed like that a long time .
Finally , after shaking my arm a little , and jerking his head up and down three times , he sighed like it was his last breath .
Come with me .
I'll go tell the king about this .
Love is such a violent emotion that it makes people self-destruct , as much as any strong emotion .
I'm so sorry .
That's what made him crazy .
I regret not observing him more closely before I told you to do that .
I thought he was just toying with you and meant to ruin your reputation .
Damn my suspicious thoughts !
It's as common for us old people to assume we know more than we do as for young people to be too wild and crazy .
Come on , let's go see the king .
Welcome , dear Rosencrantz and Guildenstern .
I've wanted to see you for a long time now , but I sent for you so hastily because I need your help right away .
You've probably heard about the "change" that's come over Hamlet , that's the only word for it , since inside and out he's different from what he was before .
I can't imagine what's made him so unlike himself , other than his father's death .
Both you and the king might have ordered us to execute your command , instead of asking us so politely .
But we'll obey .
Thanks , Rosencrantz and worthy Guildenstern .
Thanks , Guildenstern and worthy Rosencrantz .
I beg you to pay a visit right away to my son , who's changed too much .
Servants , take these gentlemen to see Hamlet .
I hope to God we can make him happy and do him some good !
Amen to that !
The ambassadors are back from Norway , sir .
Once again you bring good news .
Do I , sir ?
I assure your majesty I'm only doing my duty both to my God and my good king .
It looks like you've offended it .
Look , it's going away .
Stay !
I order you , speak !
What's going on , Horatio ?
You're pale and trembling .
You agree now that we're not imagining this , don't you ?
What do you think about it ?
I swear to God , if I hadn't seen this with my own eyes I'd never believe it .
Doesn't it look like the king ?
Yes , as much as you look like yourself .
The king was wearing exactly this armor when he fought the king of Norway .
And the ghost frowned just like the king did once when he attacked the Poles , traveling on the ice in sleds .
It's weird .
And I believe , unless this brain of mine is not so politically cunning as it used to be , that I've found out why Hamlet's gone crazy .
Tell me !
I want very much to find out .
All right , but first let the ambassadors speak .
Then you can hear my news , as dessert .
Then be so kind as to show them in .
Gertrude , he says he's found out the reason for your son's insanity .
I doubt it's anything but the obvious reason : his father's dying and our quick marriage .
Welcome , my good friends .
Tell me , Voltemand , what's the news from the king of Norway ?
He was very upset that Fortinbras had taken advantage of his being old and sick to deceive him , and he ordered Fortinbras's arrest .
Fortinbras swore never to threaten Denmark again .
The old king was so overjoyed by this promise that he gave young Fortinbras an annual income of three thousand I like this news , and when I have time I'll read this and think about how to reply .
Meanwhile , thank you for your efforts .
Go relax now .
Tonight we'll have dinner .
Welcome back !
Well , that turned out well in the end .
Sir and madam , to make grand speeches about what majesty is , what service is , or why day is day , night is night , and time is time is just a waste of a lot of day , night , and time .
Your son is crazy .
Crazy" I'm calling it , since how can you say what craziness is except to say that it's craziness ?
But that's another story .
Think about it .
I have a daughter ( I have her until she gets married ) who's given me this letter , considering it her duty .
Madam , please be patient .
I'll read it to you .
Oh , Ophelia , I'm bad at poetry .
I can't put my feelings into verse , but please believe I love you best , oh , best of all .
Believe it .
Hamlet." Dutifully and obediently my daughter showed me this letter , and more like it .
And how did she react to all this ?
Sir , what is your opinion of me ?
I know you are loyal and honorable .
I would like to prove to you that I am .
No , I had to do something .
And so I said to my daughter : "Lord Hamlet is a prince , he's out of your league .
It may be , it certainly may be .
Has there ever been a time , I'd really like to know , when I've definitely said something was true , and it turned out not to be true ?
Not that I know of .
What can we do to find out if it's true ?
Well , you know he sometimes walks here in the lobby for four hours at a time .
Yes , he does .
When he's there next time , I'll send my daughter to see him .
Please go away , both of you .
I'll speak to him now .
Oh , please let me .
How are you , Hamlet ?
Fine , thank you .
Do you know who I am ?
The town is besieged , and the trumpet calls us to the gap , and we talk and do nothing , by Christ .
It's a disgrace to us all .
I swear by the mass , before I close my eyes to go to sleep , I'll put in some good fighting , or I'll lie in the ground dead .
Captain Macmorris , I think , see , correct me if I'm wrong , there are not many of your nation , My nation ?
What is my nation ?
It's a villain and a bastard and a coward and a rascal .
What is my nation ?
Who talks of my nation ?
Captain Macmorris , if you take my words in some way other than how they were meant , see , I'll have to think you're not treating me with the good will you ought to , see , since I am as good a man as yourself , both in the practice of war and in my country of origin and in other respects .
I do not know that you are as good a man as myself .
So , by Christ , I'll cut off your head .
Now , now , both of you gentlemen !
Yes , and that's a serious failing .
The town is asking for a pause in the fighting for negotiation .
Captain Macmorris , when we have more leisure , see , I will be so bold as to show you I know about the practice of warfare , and that's that .
What has the governor of the town decided ?
This is the final discussion I will grant .
So submit to my mercy or , like men who revel in their own destruction , challenge me to do my worst .
For , as I am a soldier , the name I think suits me best , once I begin my attack on Harfleur again , I will not leave the half-conquered town until she lies buried in her own ashes .
The gates of mercy will be closed by then , and harsh and hard-hearted soldiers , who have tasted blood , will have free reign to commit whatever violence they want , mowing down your lovely young virgins and budding infants .
What power can rein in promiscuous evil once it's gotten rolling ?
We might as well send orders to the whale to come ashore as try to restore order in soldiers carried away with their looting .
What do you say ?
Will you surrender and avoid all this or be called to account for the destruction of this town ?
Today our hopes are at an end .
The Dauphin , whom we asked for reinforcements , sends back the answer that he's not yet in a position to raise so great an army .
Therefore , great king , we surrender our town and lives to your kind mercy .
Open your gates .
Come , uncle Exeter , enter Harfleur .
Stay there and fortify it well against the French .
Tonight in Harfleur we will be your guest ; tomorrow we'll march on .
No , I'll recite it for you right now : "de hand , de fangres , de nails , " "De nails , " madame .
Ugh !
That's enough for one lesson .
He's certainly crossed the river Somme .
And if he advances unopposed , my lord , let us abandon France .
Let us leave everything and give our vineyards to the barbarous nation .
God alive !
If they march along unopposed , I will sell my dukedom for a sodden , filthy farm in that craggy isle of Albion .
Doesn't the sun shine palely down on them , as though in contempt , killing their fruit with frowns ?
And shall our lively blood , quickened by wine , be so frosty ?
Where is Montjoy , the herald ?
Send him on his way quickly .
Tell him to greet the king of England with our sharp defiance .
Rise , princes , and , with a spirit of honor more sharply edged than your swords , rush to the battlefield : Charles Delabreth , High Constable of France ; you dukes of Orleans , Bourbon , Berri , Alencon , Brabant , Bar , and Burgundy ; Jaques Chatillon , Rambures , Vaudemont , Beaumont , Grandpre , Roussi , and Fauconberg , Foix , Lestrale , Bouciqualt , and Charolois .
Stop Harry of England , who is now sweeping through our land with banners drenched in the French blood he spilled at Harfleur .
Have Montjoy hurry , then , Lord Constable , and have him ask the king of England what he is willing to pay us to get out of the war .
Prince Dauphin , you'll stay with me in Rouen .
No , please , I beg your Majesty .
Be patient , because you're staying with me .
Go now , Lord Constable and all you princes , and quickly bring us news of England's defeat .
Is the duke of Exeter safe ?
He is called Ensign Pistol .
I don't know him .
Here he is .
Captain , I have a favor to beg of you .
You're on very good terms with the duke of Exeter .
Yes , God be praised , I have managed to earn his favor .
She provides an excellent moral .
I'm glad to hear it .
Discipline must be kept .
Then die and be damned !
Why , that man is a total fraud and rascal .
What he just said to me , it's alright .
And what a beard trimmed like the general's or a rough uniform will do among foaming mugs and brains washed with ale , you wouldn't believe .
But you must learn to recognize such liars , or you will be greatly taken advantage of .
If I find an opportunity , I will give him a piece of my mind .
Tell me , Fluellen : did you just come from the bridge ?
Yes , your Majesty .
The duke of Exeter has held the bridge very gallantly .
The French have retreated , see , and there were great acts of courage .
Indeed , the enemy nearly took the bridge , but he was forced to retreat , and the duke of Exeter holds the bridge .
I can tell your Majesty , the duke is a brave man .
What men have you lost , Fluellen ?
The enemy's losses have been very great , pretty substantial .
To tell the truth , though , I think the duke hasn't lost a single man , except for one who will probably be executed for robbing a church , one Bardolph , I don't know if your Majesty knows the man .
I want all such offenders to be dealt with that way , and I give precise orders that in our progress through the country there shall be nothing seized from the villages , nothing taken that is not paid for , none of the French harassed or abused in disrespectful language .
You know from my clothing who I am .
Well then , I know who you are .
What do you have to tell me ?
My master's decision .
Go ahead .
My king says this : "Tell Harry of England : though we appeared dead , we were only asleep .
Strategy makes a better soldier than haste .
Tell him we could have driven him back at Harfleur but thought it unwise to burst a pustule before it had fully ripened .
Now the time is right for us to speak , and we do so with imperial authority .
Favorably , except that there wasn't enough time for his Grace to hear , as I sensed he would have liked to , the details about how he is rightfully entitled to certain dukedoms in France , and to the throne of France in general , through clear lines of descent originating with his great-grandfather , Edward III .
What kept you from telling him this ?
The French ambassador arrived at that moment and asked to see the king .
And , in fact , I think they're meeting together right now .
Is it four o'clock ?
It is .
Then let's go in and hear what he has to say , though I think I can guess before the Frenchman has uttered a word .
have lost , and the indignity we have endured , for which he is too insignificant to sufficiently pay us back .
His coffers are too poor to atone for our losses , his entire kingdom too small to account for the amount of blood we've shed , and the sight of him kneeling at our feet an empty satisfaction compared to the indignity we have put up with .
Add defiance to all this and , by way of conclusion , tell him that he has betrayed the men who follow him , whose death sentence has been pronounced." My king and master's message delivered , my task is done .
What is your name ?
I know your position .
Montjoy .
You do your job well .
Go back and tell your king I do not seek an encounter with him now but would be willing to march on to Calais without interference , for , to be honest , though it's probably unwise to confess this to a powerful enemy who has the advantage , my men are considerably weakened by illness , my numbers reduced , and those few men I have almost no better than so many Frenchmen , though when they were in good form , I tell you , herald , I thought three Frenchmen walked on every pair of English legs .
But God forgive me for bragging .
Anyway , go tell your master I am here .
I'll deliver the message .
I thank your Highness .
I hope they don't attack us now .
We're in God's hands , brother , not in theirs .
March to the bridge .
Night is approaching .
I have the best armor in the world .
I wish it were day !
You have wonderful armor , but give my horse his due .
It is the best horse in Europe .
Will it never be morning ?
My lord of Orleans , and my lord high Constable , are you talking about horses and armor ?
You are as well provided in both respects as any prince in the world .
What a long night this is !
I will not trade my horse for any that walks on four legs .
He leaps from the ground as if his insides were light as hairs .
The earth sings when he touches it .
The lowest part of his hoof is more musical than Pan's pipe .
He's the color of nutmeg .
And hot as ginger .
He is an animal worthy of Perseus .
He is indeed worthy of the name "horse , " and you can call all the rest beasts .
Indeed , my lord , he is a perfectly wonderful horse .
He is the prince of horses .
His neigh is like a monarch's command .
Enough , cousin .
No , the man who can not extol the virtues of my horse from dawn to dusk is not particularly clever .
It's a subject as worthy of endless discussion as the changing sea .
If each grain of sand had a tongue to eulogize , my horse would be a topic for them all .
He is a subject for a king to contemplate , and for a king's king to ride on , and for the world at large , both friend and stranger , to stop whatever they are doing and marvel at .
I once wrote a sonnet in his praise which began , "Wonder of nature , " I have heard a sonnet to one's mistress that began like that .
Then the writer imitated the one I composed to my steed , for my horse is my mistress .
Your mistress is a good mount .
So , perhaps , did yours .
Mine wasn't wearing a bridle .
Oh , then I guess she was old and gentle , and you rode barelegged , like an Irish yokel .
You're a good judge of horsemanship .
Take a tip from me , then .
I'd rather have my horse than a mistress .
I'd prefer to keep my mistress rather than some lame horse .
I'll tell you this , Constable , my mistress has his own hair .
I could make the same boast even if I had a pig as my mistress .
The dog returns to its own vomit , and the newly washed sow to its mud puddle." You'd take anything for a mistress .
At least I don't have a horse for my mistress , or a saying so beside the point .
My Lord Constable , are those stars or suns I saw on the armor in your tent tonight ?
Stars , my lord .
I hope some will fall off tomorrow .
And yet I'll still have plenty .
No doubt , for you wear too many in the first place , and it might be more seemly to make do with fewer .
Yes , like your horse , who , staggering under your boasts , would trot more easily if some of them dismounted .
I only wish I could load him up with all the praise he deserves !
Oh , will it never be day ?
I'd say the same thing , but I'm afraid I'd be faced out of my way .
It's midnight .
I'll go put my armor on .
The Dauphin really wants it to be morning .
He wants to eat the English .
Swear by her foot , so she can stamp out the oath .
He's definitely the most active gentleman of France .
Performing is activity , and he is always doing that .
He never did harm that I heard of .
And he's not going to do any tomorrow .
That part of his reputation will stand .
I know him to be valiant .
I was told that by one who knows him better than you .
Who was that ?
Why , he told me so himself , and he said he didn't care who knew it .
He doesn't have to care .
His virtue is not hidden .
His courage is hidden , and when it is revealed , it will shrink .
Ill will never prompted anything well said .
I'll go straight for that proverb with "To hell with the devil." You are better at proverbs than I am by as much as "A fool shoots quickly and overshoots his mark." You have overshot .
I've outshot you , and not for the first time .
My Lord High Constable , the English lie within fifteen hundred paces of your tents .
Who measured the ground ?
The Lord Grandpre .
Poor Harry of England !
He doesn't long for the dawn as we do .
What a miserable and obstinate fellow this king of England is , to blunder with his fat-headed followers so far beyond his capacity .
If the English had any sense , they would run away .
If there were anything inside their heads , they could never wear such heavy helmets .
That island of England breeds very valiant creatures .
Their hounds are unequaled in courage .
Foolish dogs , blindly running straight toward a Russian bear only to have their heads crushed like rotten apples .
You might just as well say , "That's a valiant flea that dares to eat its breakfast on the lip of a lion." Yes , exactly .
And the men resemble their English hounds in their loud , showy ferocity , too , leaving their brains behind with their wives .
Give them hefty meals of beef and iron and steel , and they will eat like wolves and fight like devils .
Yes , but these English are seriously short of beef .
Then tomorrow we'll find that they feel only like eating , not like fighting .
It's time to put our armor on .
Shall we get started ?
It's two o'clock now .
But let me see , by ten we shall each have captured a hundred Englishmen .
Now summon up the image of stealthy murmurs and engulfing darkness filling the wide vessel of the universe .
He bids them good morning with a modest smile and calls
Where is my gracious lord of Canterbury ?
He's not here .
Send for him , dear uncle .
Shall we call in the ambassador , my liege ?
Not yet , cousin .
Before I hear him , I want to decide some important issues that are on my mind concerning my throne and France .
May God and his angels guard your sacred throne and grant that you dignify it for a long time .
Thank you , I'm sure .
My learned lord , kindly explain to us the legal and religious grounds for why this French Salic law either should or shouldn't bar me in my claim .
For God knows how many healthy men will shed their blood in support of whatever you persuade me to do .
them brothers , friends , and countrymen .
There is no indication of the mighty army that surrounds them in his expression , nor has the long , sleepless night robbed his face of an ounce of color .
Gloucester , it's true that we are in great danger .
But our courage should only be the greater for that .
Good morning , brother Bedford .
God Almighty , there must be some essential goodness even in evil , if men would only look for it .
In our case , our bad neighbors over their make us early risers , a healthy and sensible thing to be .
Besides , they act as outward consciences and preachers to us all , a visible reminder that we should prepare ourselves for death .
Think like that , and you'll manage to get honey out of a common weed and find a moral lesson in the devil himself .
Good morning , old Sir Thomas Erpingham !
A nice , soft pillow would be a more suitable place to lay that good white head than France's hard , cold ground .
It eases the spirit .
And when the mind is engaged , the rest of the body , dead and dull before , wakes up and comes to life with a new nimbleness and sensitivity , like a snake shedding its dead skin .
Lend me your cloak , Sir Thomas .
We shall , my liege .
Shall I accompany your Grace ?
No , my good knight .
Go with my brothers to my English peers .
I need to be alone with my thoughts for a while and don't want any company .
The Lord in heaven bless you , noble Harry !
A friend .
Or are you low , vulgar , and of the common people ?
I am a gentleman of a company .
Do you carry a pike ?
Exactly .
What about you ?
I'm as good a gentleman as the emperor .
Then you're a better man than the king .
The king's a dear boy with a heart of gold , he's a lively lad , a wag , born of fine parents , good with his fists .
I kiss his dirty shoe , and from the bottom of my heart I love the lovely boy .
What is your name ?
Harry le Roy .
Le Roy ?
That's a Cornish name .
Are you with a Cornish company ?
No , I am a Welshman .
Do you know Fluellen ?
Yes .
Tell him I'll take the leek out of his hat on Saint Davy's Day and slap his head with it .
You'd better not wear your dagger in your cap that day , or he might slap your head with it .
Are you his friend ?
Yes , and his relative , too .
Thank you .
God be with you .
My name is Pistol .
The name suits your fierceness .
Captain Fluellen !
It never ceases to amaze me the way people ignore the correct , traditional principles and rules of war .
If you would take the trouble to study the tactics of Pompey the Great , I can tell you that you would find no tittle-tattle or pibble-pabble in Pompey's camp .
I tell you , you would find the rituals of war and , I promise you , its ceremonies and its solicitudes and its forms and its gravity and its discipline all to be quite counter to all this noise .
But the enemy is loud .
You can hear them all night long .
And if the enemy is an ass and a fool and a prating idiot , does that mean , you think , that we should also be an ass and a fool and a prating idiot ?
Think about it .
I will lower my voice .
Though he seems a little old-fashioned , there is much care and courage in this Welshman .
Brother John Bates , isn't that dawn breaking over there ?
That's the beginning of the day we see , but I don't think we'll see the end of it. , Who goes there ?
A friend .
What captain do you serve ?
Sir Thomas Erpingham .
A veteran commander and a very kind gentleman .
Tell me , what does he think of our situation ?
We're men beached on the sand , hoping to be washed out by the next tide .
He hasn't told this to the king , has he ?
The violet smells to him the same as it does to me .
And though his feelings may be pitched higher than ours , when they plummet , they plummet that much farther .
Therefore , when he has reason to fear , as we do , his fears are without question of the same order .
Still , it stands to reason that he mustn't betray his fear , as it might dishearten his army .
He can act as brave as he wants , but I believe on a cold night like this he wishes he were neck-deep in the Thames , and I wish he were , too , and I with him , whatever the danger , so long as we were far away from here .
I'll tell you truly what I think about the king in my heart .
I don't think he wants to be anywhere but where he is .
Oh , I'm sure you don't dislike him so much as to wish he were here alone , even though you say this to find out how the rest of us feel .
I don't think there's anywhere I'd rather die than in the king's company , as his cause is just and honorable .
That's more than we know .
If his cause is wrong , our obedience to the king clears us of responsibility for it .
But if the cause is not just , the king himself will have a lot to answer for , when all those legs and arms and heads chopped off in battle shall join together on Judgment Day crying , "We died at such and such a place." Some will be swearing , some crying for a surgeon , some for the wives that are destitute without them , some about the debts they owed , some for their children left unprovided for .
I think few die well who die in battle .
The father and the master and the king didn't order their subordinates ' deaths when they ordered their services .
Besides , there's no king , however pure his cause , who , if it comes to a trial by combat , can rely on using completely blameless soldiers .
Even if these men have escaped the law and punishment at home , they can not escape God .
When they feared death , they escaped with their lives ; and now where they imagine they're safe , they perish .
So , if they die unprepared , the king is no more guilty of their damnation than he was guilty of the earlier crimes they're finally being punished for .
Every subject's duty is the king's , but every subject's soul is his own .
Therefore , every soldier should do as any man who is sick in his bed would do : clear his conscience of any stain .
Then if he dies , his death serves him .
It's clear , every man must take responsibility for the manner of his own death .
The king is not responsible for it .
I don't expect him to answer for me , and yet I'm determined to fight vigorously for him .
I myself heard the king say he would not be ransomed .
If I live to see it , I'll never trust his word again .
Yeah , right , go get him .
That's a lame threat from a toy gun , a poor individual's private displeasure with a monarch .
You may as well try to turn the sun to ice by fanning its face with a peacock feather .
You'll "never trust his word again." Come on , that was a stupid thing to say .
Your scolding is somewhat overblown .
I'd be angry with you if the occasion allowed .
Let it be a quarrel between us , if you live .
I'm game .
How will I recognize you in the future ?
Give me some trinket of yours , and I will wear it in my hat .
Then , if you dare to acknowledge it , I'll take up my quarrel with you .
Here .
I'll also wear this in my cap .
If you come to me after tomorrow and say , "That's my glove , " I swear by this hand , I will take it and give you a box on the ear .
If I ever see it , I will challenge you .
You may as well undertake to be hanged .
I'll do it even if I find you in the company of the king himself .
Keep your word .
Farewell .
Indeed , the French can bet twenty French crowns to one that they'll beat us , they have such an army .
But it's no treason for an Englishman to cut off a French crown , a head , I mean , and tomorrow the king himself will do some snipping .
to wage war .
I charge you , in the name of God , be careful what you say .
With this in mind , speak , my lord .
Then hear me , gracious sovereign , and all you peers who owe your lives and duty to this imperial throne .
Upon the king !
Let's lay everything upon the king : our lives , our souls , our debts , our anxious wives , our children , and our sins." I must bear responsibility for all of it .
What a painful condition responsibility is .
It goes along with being born to greatness , but it makes you get badmouthed by every fool who only has his own suffering to care about .
What infinite peace do king's give up that private men enjoy ?
What do kings have that private men do not , besides the pomp of their position ?
And what is this useless ceremony of kings ?
What kind of god is ceremony , which suffers more than its worshippers do ?
What income , what profit does it bring in ?
Oh , ceremony , only show me your value !
Why are you adored ?
You're less happy , being feared , than they are in fearing you .
What do you get to drink , instead of sweet obedience , but poisonous flattery ?
Try being sick , great greatness , and see if ceremony can cure you !
Do you think fiery fever can be put out by the windy puff of titles ?
Will it be chased away by bowing and scraping ?
You can command a beggar to bow on bended knee , but can you take possession of his health ?
No , vain illusion , so intricately bound up with a king's rest .
dusk and all night long sleeps in peace .
My lord , your noble subjects are looking for you all over the camp .
Good old knight , gather them all together at my tent .
I'll meet you there .
Consider it done , my lord .
Oh God of battles , bolster my soldiers ' courage .
Don't let them know fear .
Rob them of the ability to count before the numbers against them overwhelm their courage .
And just for today , Oh , Lord , just today don't think of the crime my father committed in seizing the crown !
I've transferred Richard's body to a new grave and on it poured more tears of remorse than it has shed drops of blood .
I've hired five hundred almsmen to hold up their withered hands to heaven , praying for my pardon twice a day throughout the year .
And I've built two chapels where solemn priests sing continually for Richard's soul .
I will do more , though nothing I can do is any good since this remorse comes after the crime , asking for pardon .
My liege .
My brother Gloucester's voice ?
I'll go with you .
The day , my friends , and everything await me .
The sun glints off our armor .
Awake , my lords !
Is it time , my Lord Constable ?
Listen to our horses neighing , longing to be working .
Ha !
What , you want them to weep our horses ' blood ?
Then how will we see their own natural tears ?
The English are in the field , French lords .
To our horses , you gallant princes .
What's there to say ?
Our advance will so dazzle the enemy that England will cower in fear and surrender .
What are you waiting for , lords of France ?
Those island-bred skeletons , terrified for their bones , are an offensive sight on the morning field .
The horsemen stand frozen like candlesticks , torches in their hands .
Meanwhile , their They've said their prayers , and now they wait for death .
Shall we go send them food and fresh clothing and feed their starving horses before we fight them ?
To the field !
I'll take the banner from a trumpeter and use that .
Come , let's be off !
The sun is up and we're wasting the day !
Where is the king ?
The king rode out alone to view their troops .
They have fully sixty thousand fighting men .
That's five to one .
Besides , they're fresh .
May God's arm strike on our side !
These are frightening odds .
God be with all of you , princes .
I'll go and join my men .
Farewell , good Salisbury ; and may good luck go with you .
Farewell , kind lord .
Fight valiantly today .
But then I do you wrong to say as much , since you are the very embodiment of bravery .
He is as full of courage as of kindness , princely in both .
Oh , if only we had with us here ten thousand of those men back home in England who aren't working today .
Who wishes that ?
My cousin Westmoreland ?
No , my dear cousin .
If we are slated to die , the fewer , the better for our country , and if we're slated to live , the fewer men , the greater the share of honor for each of us .
In God's name , I beg you not to wish for one more man .
By God , I am not selfish when it comes to money : I don't care who eats at my expense .
But if it is a sin to be selfish about honor , I am the most guilty soul alive .
No , my cousin , don't wish that even one man who is now in England were here instead .
By God , I wouldn't lose as much honor as a single man more would cost me , I think , not even if it meant giving up my best hope for victory .
Oh , do not wish one more !
He will be given safe conduct and money for his passage home .
We would not want to die in the company of a man who fears to die with us .
He who survives this day and lives to see old age shall yearly entertain his neighbors on the eve , saying , "Tomorrow is
We're ready if our minds are ready .
Let any man perish who isn't ready now !
You don't wish we had more help from England anymore , cousin ?
God be with you all .
Once more I come to ask you , King Harry , if you're ready to negotiate your ransom before your certain defeat .
For assuredly , you are so near the abyss that you're bound to be swallowed up .
Moreover , out of mercy , the Constable urges you to remind your men to make their peace with God and repent , so that their souls may depart sweetly and peacefully from these fields where , poor wretches , their bodies will likely fall and fester .
Who sent you this time ?
The Constable of France .
Be good enough to take back the same answer I gave before .
Tell them to capture me , then sell my bones .
The man that once sold the skin of a lion while the beast still lived died hunting him .
And on their graves , I trust , the story of this day's work will be written in brass .
And those who leave their valiant bones in France , dying like men though buried in your dunghills , they'll be remembered , too .
Besides , according to the French historians , King Pepin , who deposed Childeric , based his own claim to the crown of France on his descent from Blithild , the daughter of King Clothair .
Another case : Hugh Capet , who usurped the crown from Charles the duke of Lorraine , sole male heir in a direct line from Charles the Great , passed himself off as heir to Lady Lingare , daughter of Charlemagne , who was the son of Lewis the Emperor ( who was the son of Charles the Great ) , in order to give his claim to the throne more validity ( though , in fact , the claim was completely false and worthless ) .
Another case : King Lewis the Tenth , who was sole heir to the usurper Capet , could not rest easy as king until he was assured that Queen Isabel , his grandmother , was a direct descendent of the Lady Ermengare , daughter of the aforementioned Charles duke of Lorraine , by which marriage the line of Charles the Great was reunited with the throne of France .
Thus , it should be clear as day that King Pepin's title , Hugh Capet's claim , and the resolution of King Lewis's doubts all plainly derive from the female .
Let me speak proudly : tell the Constable we're only workaday soldiers .
There's not a strand of feather left in our whole army , a good sign , I hope , that we won't fly away like birds , and time on the field has made us slovenly .
If they do this , as they will , God willing , my ransom will soon be raised .
Herald , spare yourself .
Don't come again to ask for my ransom , good messenger .
I swear the only ransom will be these bones of mine .
Tell the constable that .
I shall , King Harry .
And so farewell .
You'll never hear from the herald again .
I'm afraid you'll come to me again for ransom .
My lord , most humbly on bended knee I beg you to grant me the leading of the vanguard .
Take it , brave York .
Now , soldiers , advance .
Surrender , dog !
Is that a lot of He says his name is Master Fer .
Master Fer !
What does he say ?
He begs you to spare his life .
He is a gentleman of a good family , and for his ransom , he will give you two hundred crowns .
Tell him my fury will abate , and I'll take the crowns .
Explain , boy .
He thanks you on his knees many times and considers himself fortunate to have fallen into the hands of one , as he thinks , who is the bravest , most valorous , and thrice-worthy gentleman of England .
As I get to leech him , I will show some mercy .
Follow me .
I never heard so loud a voice issue from such an empty heart .
I have to stay with the servants , who are with our camp's luggage .
We're sitting ducks for the French , if they only knew it , for there is no one guarding it but boys .
Regret and everlasting shame sit on our helmets , mocking us .
Do not run away .
Our men have all broken ranks .
O , everlasting shame !
Let's fall on our swords .
Are these the wretches that we threw dice for ?
Is this the king we offered to ransom ?
Shame , eternal shame , and nothing but shame !
Let us die honorably .
He who will not follow me now , let him depart and stand in the doorway like a pimp , cap in hand , while some slave , no nobler than my dog , violates his daughter .
Maybe we can benefit from the same chaos that has defeated us .
Let's go offer up our lives
There are enough of us still alive in the field to overcome the English with our numbers if we could just restore some kind of order .
The hell with order !
I'm going back into battle .
Let life be short so that shame won't last too long .
The French are still fighting .
The duke of York sends your Majesty his respects .
Is he still alive , good uncle ?
Three times in an hour I saw him down , and three times up again and fighting .
He was covered with blood from his helmet to his spurs .
By his side lies the noble earl of Suffolk , York's comrade and equal in brave wounds .
Suffolk died first , and York , cut to pieces , came to him where he lay in his blood and took him by the face , kissing his gashes .
He cried out , "Wait for me , dear cousin .
My soul will keep yours company on the way to heaven .
Wait for mine , sweet soul .
The French have reinforced their scattered men .
Then every soldier must kill his prisoners .
Spread the word .
To this day , the kings of France follow this unspoken rule , even though they point to this Salic law to bar your Highness from inheriting it through the female line .
Can I justifiably and in good conscience make this claim ?
For it is written in the book of Numbers : "When the man dies , let the inheritance descend unto the daughter." Gracious lord , claim what is yours .
Go to the tomb of your great-grandfather , from whom your own title to the crown derives .
Invoke his warlike spirit and that of Edward the Black Prince , your great-uncle , who fought a tragic battle on French soil , routing the French army in full force while his mighty father stood by on a hilltop , smiling to see his son steeped in the blood of French noblemen .
O noble English , who could take on the entire French army with only half their forces , leaving the other half to stand by , idle and laughing .
Awaken the memory of those valiant ancestors and with your own powerful arm make their deeds live again .
You are their heir and sit on their throne , and the blood and courage that glorified them run in your veins .
To kill the boys with the luggage !
It's expressly against the rules of combat .
It's as complete a work of villainy as any that could be thought up .
There's certainly not a boy left alive , and it was done by the cowardly rascals who were running from the battle .
On top of this , they've either burned or carried away everything that was in the king's tent .
Oh , he's a gallant king !
Yes , he was born at Monmouth , Captain Gower .
And is "pig" not the same as "great , " may I ask ?
The pig or the mighty or the huge or the magnanimous , they all mean the same thing , with some variation .
I think Alexander the Great was born in Macedon .
His father was Philip of Macedon , as I remember .
I think that Macedon is indeed where Alexander was born .
I tell you , Captain , if you look at a map of the world , I'll bet you will find , comparing Macedon and Monmouth , that the situations , see , are very similar .
There is a river in Macedon , and there is likewise a river in Monmouth .
The river in Monmouth is called Wye , but the name of the other river has gone out of my head .
Nevertheless , it's all one , the two rivers are as alike as my fingers are to my fingers , and there are salmon in both .
If you look closely at Alexander's life , Harry of Monmouth's stands up fairly well by comparison , for there are analogies in everything .
Alexander , God knows and you know , in his rages and his furies and his wraths and his angers and his moods and his displeasures and his indignations , and also being a little the worse for drink , killed his best friend Cleitus in a drunken rage , see .
It is not courteous , you know , to assume you know my meaning before I've finished talking .
I'm speaking purely in analogies and comparisons .
Sir John Falstaff .
That's the one .
I tell you , there are good men born at Monmouth .
Here comes his Majesty .
I was not angry since I came to France until this instant .
Take a trumpet , herald .
Ride out to the horsemen on that hill .
If they seek battle with us , have them come down or else clear the field .
The sight of them is offensive .
If they'll do neither , we'll come to them and make them fly like stones shot from powerful slings .
Go and tell them this .
Here comes the herald of the French , my liege .
He looks humbler than he used to .
Don't you know that I have offered these bones of mine for ransom ?
Are you coming again for ransom ?
No , great king .
I come to ask you out of charity to let us wander over this bloody field to record the numbers of our dead and bury them , separating our nobles from the common men , for many of our princes , alas ! , lie drowned and soaked in the blood of mercenary soldiers .
Likewise , our common men lie drenched in the blood of princes , and their wounded steeds , ankle-deep in gore , struggle and , raging wildly , stamp on their dead masters with their hooves , killing them a second time .
Oh , give us permission , great king , to search the field in safety and dispose of our dead bodies .
You won it .
God , not our strength , be praised !
What is the name of the castle that stands over there ?
Agincourt .
Then we'll call this the Battle of Agincourt , fought on the day of Crispin Crispianus .
If I may say so , your Majesty , your famous grandfather and your great-uncle Edward , the Black Prince of Wales , or so I've read in the history books , fought a very brave battle here in France .
They did , Fluellen .
Your Majesty is quite right .
If your Majesties recall it , the Welsh fought very valiantly in a garden where there were leeks growing , wearing leeks in their Monmouth caps which , your Majesty knows , is to this day a badge of honorable military service .
I do believe your Majesty takes no shame in wearing the leek on Saint Davy's Day .
I wear it with pride , for I am Welsh you know , good countryman .
Thanks , my good countryman .
By Jesus , I am your Majesty's countryman , and I don't care who knows it .
I will confess it to all the world .
I needn't be ashamed of your Majesty , God be praised , so long as your Majesty is an honest man .
God keep me so. , Heralds , go with him .
Bring me an exact report of the number of dead on both sides .
Soldier , you must come to the king .
Soldier , why are you wearing that glove in your cap ?
If it pleases your Majesty , it is the token of a man I must fight with , if he's still alive .
An Englishman ?
If I may say so , your Majesty , as I see it he would be a coward and a villain not to .
It may be that his antagonist is a gentleman of very high degree , quite outside of his own sphere .
Even if he were as important a man as the devil , as Lucifer or Beelzebub himself , he's required , see , your Grace , to keep his vow .
If he backs down , he'll become as notorious a villain and as saucy a Jack as ever walked on God's earth , in my opinion .
Then keep your vow , fellow , when you meet the man .
So I will , my liege .
Whom do you serve under ?
Under Captain Gower , my liege .
Gower is a good captain , and is well versed and well read in the wars .
Have him come to me here , soldier .
I will , my liege .
Here , Fluellen , stick this in your cap .
Your Grace does me as great an honor as could be wished by any of his subjects .
Do you know Captain Gower ?
He is my dear friend , your Majesty .
Go find him , please , and bring him to my tent .
I'll fetch him .
My Lord of Warwick and my brother Gloucester , follow Fluellen at a close distance .
The glove which I have given him to wear may possibly win him a box on the ear .
According to an agreement , I should wear it myself .
Follow and see to it that nothing serious happens between them .
You come with me , uncle of Exeter .
I'm sure it is to knight you , Captain .
As it is God's will and pleasure , Captain , I entreat you to come quickly to the king .
Sir , do you recognize this glove ?
Know the glove !
I know the glove is a glove .
Well , I recognize this one Good God !
As absolute a traitor as any in the whole entire world , or even France or England !
Do you think I'd break my oath ?
Stand aside , Captain Gower .
I'll reward treason with blows , I promise you .
I'm not a traitor .
Arrest him : he's a friend of the duke of Alencon's .
My Lord of Warwick , a most corrupt treason , God be praised for it ! , has been discovered , as plain as any you'd hope to see on a summer's day .
Here is his Majesty .
My liege , this man is a villain and a traitor , who , see , your Grace , has struck the glove which your Majesty took from Alencon's helmet .
My liege , this was my glove .
I met this man with my glove in his cap , and I have been as good as my word .
Your Majesty , see here , if it won't offend your Grace , what a complete , rascally , beggarly , lousy rat this is .
I hope your Majesty will , in all good conscience , bear me out and vouch for the fact that this is the glove of Alencon and that your Majesty gave it to me .
It was I , in fact , whom you promised to strike .
And so you do .
Their bodies may remain here in England , but their hearts are encamped on the fields of France already .
Oh , let their bodies follow , my dear king , to win back what's rightfully yours with blood and sword and fire .
What we have to worry about is a full-scale invasion from Scotland , always an unreliable neighbor .
If it pleases your Majesty , let his neck pay the price , if there is any martial law in the world .
How can you square things with me ?
You abused me to my face .
Your Majesty didn't present yourself as the king .
You represented yourself as just a common man .
Anything your Highness suffered in that disguise , I beg you to see it as your own fault and not mine , because if you'd been what I took you for , there would have been no offense .
Therefore , I beg your Highness , pardon me .
I'll have none of your money .
It's meant in good will .
I tell you , you can use it to get your shoes fixed .
Come , why be so hesitant ?
Your shoes are in pretty bad shape .
It's a good shilling , I promise you .
Now , herald , have the dead been counted ?
Here is the count of the slaughtered French .
What prisoners of rank have been taken , uncle ?
This paper tells me of ten thousand Frenchmen who lie dead on the battlefield .
Among them are one hundred twenty-six princes and standard-bearing nobles .
Add to these eight thousand four hundred knights , squires , and brave gentlemen , five hundred of whom were given the title of knight only yesterday .
Among the ten thousand the French have lost only sixteen hundred are mercenaries .
The rest of the dead are princes , barons , lords , knights , squires , and gentlemen of birth and rank .
Of brave earls , Grandpre and Roussi , Fauconberg and Foix , Beaumont and Marle , Vaudemont and Lestrale .
Where is the number of our English dead ?
When was there ever before so great a loss on one side and so little on the other , in the ordinary and equal clash of battle ?
Take credit , God , for it is no one's doing but yours .
It's unbelievable .
Yes , Captain , but with this acknowledgement , that God fought for us .
Yes , I truly think He did great good .
We'll perform all the holy rites .
As for those who have , I beg you to excuse the gaps in time , and the many people and things that can not be represented here in all their magnitude and proper form .
Let's have him land and solemnly proceed to London .
Thoughts work so quickly that even now you can imagine him on Blackheath , where his lords suggest that he should carry his battle-scarred sword and helmet on a procession through the city .
He refuses , as he is free of vanity and self-serving pride and ascribes all the glory and responsibility for victory to God .
Now in the factory of thought , create the image of all London pouring forth into the streets .
Picture the mayor and all his brother citizens dressed in their best as they go forth like senators of ancient Rome to welcome home their conquering Caesar .
Skip over all the particularities between then and Harry's return to France .
Saint Davy's Day has passed .
There are reasons and causes why and how in everything .
We were somewhere where I couldn't pick a fight with him , but I've decided to wear it in my cap until I see him again , whereupon I'll give him a little piece of my mind .
And here he comes , puffing himself up like a turkey .
Are you mad ?
Away !
The smell of leek turns my stomach .
I wonder if you'd be so good , you lousy , rotten villain , to grant my wish and my request and gratify me , see , by eating this leek .
I'd like you to , see , because you don't like it , and because it isn't to your taste , and because it doesn't agree with you .
Not for Cadwallader and all his goats .
Here's a goat for you .
Dissolute lowlife , you shall die .
That's very true , mangy rascal , when it pleases God .
Meanwhile , I'd be gratified if you'd live and eat your food .
Come , here's some sauce to go with it .
Enough , Captain .
You've stunned him .
I tell you , I'll either make him eat some part of this leek or give him a four-day head-bashing. , Go on , bite .
It's good for your fresh wound and your bloody noggin .
Must I bite ?
Yes , absolutely , no question or ambiguity about it .
By this leek , I swear I'll make you pay for this .
Would you like some more sauce to go with it ?
There isn't enough leek left for you to swear on .
Lay off , already !
Can't you see I'm eating ?
I sincerely hope it does you good , mangy rascal .
No , don't throw any of it away .
The skin is good for your cracked head .
When you see leeks in the future , I hope you keep mocking them .
Good .
Yes , leeks are good .
Wait , here's a penny to heal your head .
Me , a penny ?
If I owe you anything , I'll pay you in clubbings .
You'll become a wood salesman and buy nothing but clubs from me .
God be with you and keep you , and may he heal your head .
There'll be hell to pay for this .
Go on , get out of here .
You're a lying , cowardly wretch .
You mock an ancient tradition , born of reverence and worn in honor of brave men who have died , and then have the gall not to stand by your words .
I've seen you bait and mock this man more than once .
You thought because he didn't speak English like a native he couldn't handle an English club .
Farewell .
Has Fortune turned on me , like the whore she is ?
I've had news that my Nell died of the pox in a hospice .
I grow old , and all dignity has been thrashed out of me .
Well , I'll turn pimp and do some occasional pickpocketing .
I'll steal away to England , and I'll steal some more when I get there .
I'll bandage up these wounds and swear I got them in the French wars .
But here's an old , true saying : "If you want to win France , start with Scotland." For when the eagle England leaves her nest to seek prey , the weasel Scot always comes sneaking around to suck dry her princely eggs and , like the mouse when the cat's away , destroy more than she can actually eat .
It would follow from this that the cat should stay home .
But that is a false conclusion , since we have locks to keep our valuables safe and clever traps to catch little thieves .
While the armed hand fights in foreign lands , the wise head defends itself at home .
We rejoice to see you , most worthy brother of England .
You are welcome here , as are all of you English princes .
We hope your poison has worn off and this day shall transform all grievances and quarrels into friendship .
We're here to say "amen" to that .
All you English princes , I salute you .
Great kings of France and England , I owe you both equal service and loyalty .
Your Highnesses can both attest to the fact that I've strived mightily , with all my wits and energy , to bring about this royal meeting between you two imperial Majesties .
Alas , she has been too long exiled from France , whose crops all lie in heaps , rotting with ripeness .
Her grapes , which make the wine that cheers our hearts , die unpruned on the vines .
Her once-trimmed hedges , like prisoners with wild , untended hair , put forth unruly twigs .
Her fallow fields are overgrown with weeds , while the blade that should uproot such wilderness lies rusting .
The level meadow , where the freckled cowslip , burnet , and green clover once grew , has become useless : unmowed , it grows to seed , so that nothing springs up but weeds , rough thistles , barren plants , and burs .
children have lost , or no longer have time to learn , skills that should be a credit to our country .
They grow like savages , like soldiers who meditate on nothing but blood , surrounded by swearing and stern looks , ragged clothing and everything unnatural .
Duke of Burgundy , if you want peace , the lack of which creates these misfortunes you describe , you must purchase it buy agreeing across-the-board to all our very just demands .
The king has heard them , but as yet has made no answer .
Well , the peace you pleaded for so eloquently just now lies in his answer .
I've only given the articles a cursory glance .
If your Grace would kindly appoint some members of your council to sit with me once more and go over them more carefully , I will give my answer and acceptance right away .
Fair sister , will you go with the princes or stay here with me ?
Gracious brother , I will go with them .
Perhaps a woman's voice may do some good when some small detail proves to be holding things up .
In that case , leave our cousin Katherine here with us .
She is our principal demand , one of the first points of the treaty .
She is welcome to stay .
Lovely , most lovely Katherine , will you agree to teach a soldier the words that would recommend his love-suit to a gentle heart like yours ?
Your Majesty shall mock at me .
I can not speak your England .
Lovely Katherine , if you will love me well with your French heart , I'm happy to hear you confess it in broken English .
Do you like me , Kate ?
Pardon me but I do not know what is "like me." An angel is like you , Kate , and you are like an angel .
I said so , dear Katherine , and I'm not ashamed to repeat it .
Kate , my wooing is fit for your understanding : I am glad your English isn't better .
If it were , you would find me such an ordinary king that you would think I'd sold my farm to buy my crown .
I don't know any fancy ways of talking about love , only to say right out , "I love you." If you press me any further than with the question , "Do you really ? " my love scene is over .
So give me your answer , and we'll shake on it .
Deal ?
I have no gift for the one and no strength for the other , though I have the gift of strength .
If I could win a lady by playing leapfrog or vaulting into my saddle with my armor on my back , though you may accuse me of boasting , I could easily get myself a wife .
If you can love a man of this temperament , Kate , whose face a sunburn wouldn't make any worse and who never looks in the mirror to admire himself , let your eye improve me .
I speak to you as a plain soldier .
If you can love me for this , take me .
If not , to tell you I will die is true , but not for love , by God .
And yet I do love you .
So take for life a fellow of pure and plain faithfulness .
These chatty fellows who can rhyme their way into a lady's good graces always reason themselves out again .
If you would have such a man , take me .
So what do you say to my suit ?
Speak , my fair one , and speak fairly , I beg you .
Is it possible dat I sould love de enemy of France ?
No , it is not possible you should love the enemy of France , Kate .
But in loving me , you would love the friend of France , for I love France so much that I will not part with a single village of it .
I will have it all mine .
And , Kate , when France is mine and I am yours , then France is yours and you are mine .
I don't understand all dat .
No , Kate ?
Can any of your neighbors tell , Kate ?
I'll ask them .
But mock me gently , dear Kate , because I love you terribly .
Shall we not ?
What do you say , my fair I do not know dat .
No , of course you don't .
Now there can only be the promise .
Do promise , Kate , that you'll do your French part to bring forth such a boy ; and for my English half , take the word of a king and a bachelor .
I tell you truly , in true English : I love you , Kate .
And though I wouldn't dare to swear that you love me , still my blood begins to flatter me that you do , despite the ill effects of my face .
Curse my father's ambition !
But I promise you , Kate : the older I grow the better I'll look .
My comfort is that old age , that poor preserver of beauty , can't make my face any worse than it already is .
If you have me , you have me now at my worst ; and if you have me , you'll appreciate me better and better .
Therefore tell me , fairest Katherine , will you have me ?
Take me by the hand and say , "Harry of England , I am yours." No sooner shall I hear that word than I will tell you straight out , "England is yours , Ireland is yours , France is yours , and Harry Plantagenet
is yours." And , though I say so in his presence , if he's not a friend of the best kings , you'll find him king of the best friends .
Come on , tell me in broken music , for your voice is music and your English broken .
Come , Katherine Queen of All , reveal your heart to me in broken English .
Will you have me ?
Den it shall also content me .
With that I kiss your hand and call you my queen .
Then I will kiss your lips , Kate .
What does she say , madam interpreter ?
Dat it not be de custom pour les ladies of France , I can not tell vat is To kiss .
It is not the custom for the maids in France to kiss before they are married , is that what she says ?
Oh , Kate , prudish customs bow before great kings .
You and I can not be held within the confines of a country's arbitrary customs , dear Kate .
You and I , Kate , we are the makers of custom , and the freedom that goes with our position silences all who would criticize , as I will silence you for upholding the prudish custom of your country in refusing me a kiss .
Therefore , willingly and yielding .
God save your Majesty .
My royal kinsman , are you teaching our princess English ?
I wanted to teach her how perfectly I love her , kinsman , and that's good English .
She picks it up quick , doesn't she ?
So , possessing neither a voice nor a heart for flattery , I can't awaken the spirit of love in her so as to make him appear in his true likeness .
From this , I conclude that many different elements can work toward one common end , just as many arrows , shot from different points , converge on a single target ; just as many roads meet in a single town ; just as many fresh streams empty into only one salt sea ; just as the many radiuses of a
Forgive my boldness if I take you up on your words about making magic .
For love to appear in his true likeness , he would have to be as Cupid is : naked and blind .
How can you blame her , a tender young maiden still given to virgin blushes , for objecting to having a blind , naked boy appear before her ?
It's a lot to ask of a maiden .
They're forgiven , then , if they don't see what they're doing .
Then teach your cousin to also be willing to close her eyes , my lord .
So you're telling me to give it time and wait for summer .
And even then , in order for me to catch the fly your cousin , she must be blind ?
Like love , my lord , before it learns to love .
Fair enough .
Shall Kate be my wife ?
If you wish .
I am satisfied , as long as the maiden cities you talk of come with her .
That way , the maiden that stood between me and them shall be the means of my achieving my desire .
We have consented to all reasonable terms .
Is that true , my lords of England ?
The king has agreed to every point : first his daughter , then everything else , as you strictly proposed .
Except that he has not yet agreed to address you in this form and with this title , in French , And even this I'm willing to grant if you request it .
In that case , I ask that for the sake of friendship and alliance you let that one item stand with the rest , and bestow your daughter on me .
Amen .
Now , welcome , Kate. , And let everyone bear witness that here I kiss her as my sovereign queen .
May God , who is the best matchmaker , join your hearts and realms in one .
God say , "Amen" !
Amen !
Let us prepare for our wedding. , On that day , I'll take your oath of loyalty , my Lord of Burgundy and all my peers , to guarantee my treaty .
Then I will swear to Kate and you to me , and may our oaths be faithfully kept and prove fortunate .
Thus far has our straining author pursued the story with his crude , inadequate writing , keeping important people penned up in this little room while he mangled history's full glory with his uneven telling .
Henry the Sixth , crowned king of France and England while still in his infancy , succeeded him .
With those plays in mind , we hope you'll receive this one kindly .
If we can not defend our country with three times such a power left at home , then we deserve to be harassed by an invader and lose our reputation as a powerful and politically savvy nation .
Call in the messengers sent from the Dauphin .
I'm ready now to hear what my good cousin the Dauphin has to say , for I hear that the greeting you bear is from him , not the king .
Will your Majesty grant us permission to freely express the message we've been asked to convey ?
Let your thoughts make up for our imperfections .
Divide each man into a thousand , and there you will have an imaginary army .
Imagine , when we talk of horses , that you see them planting their proud hooves in the soft earth .
I am no tyrant but a Christian king , whose emotions are as tightly controlled as the wretches who languish in our prisons .
Therefore tell me the Dauphin's mind frankly and without constraint .
You can't party your way into dukedoms there .
And in return for this gift , he wishes you to drop your claim to the dukedoms .
This is the Dauphin's message .
What's the treasure , uncle ?
Tennis balls , my liege .
I'm happy the Dauphin has such a good sense of humor .
Thank you for his present and your trouble .
Once I've put my rackets to these balls , I'll play a set in France , God willing , that will knock his father's crown right out of the court .
And I understand perfectly his sneering reference to my wilder days .
Men tend to be at their most irresponsible when they're away from home .
So go in peace .
And tell the Dauphin his joke will look pretty stupid when thousands more weep than ever laughed at it .
That was a humorous message .
I hope to make the sender blush for it .
Now , lords , don't let slip any opportunity that might be advantageous for our expedition .
Therefore , let every man give some thought to how this noble expedition may be undertaken .
Now all the young men of England are inspired and have stored their party clothes in the closet .
shifts , friends , to Southampton .
From there we'll safely carry you to France and back , calming the waters of the Channel to provide you with a smooth voyage .
But we won't shift the scene to Southampton until Henry reappears .
Good to see you , Corporal Nym .
Good day , Lieutenant Bardolph .
Tell me , are you and Ensign Pistol friends again yet ?
For my part , I really don't care .
Then we can all three be comrades on our way to France .
How about it , Corporal Nym ?
That's it .
It's not for me to say .
Things are what they are .
Men may sleep , and when they do they may have their throats with them , and some people say knives have blades .
There must be some resolution .
Well , it's not for me to say .
Here comes Ensign Pistol and his wife .
I swear , I scorn the word .
Oh , dear .
Pish !
Pish to you , you mangy dog , you pointy-eared Icelandic mutt .
Corporal Nym , be a man and put away your sword .
Get lost , will you ?
I am not some fiend of hell : you can't get rid of me with spells .
I'm in a mood to beat you up pretty good .
If you get nasty with me , Pistol , I'll stab you with my sword , in fair play .
Your grave is gaping open , and your death is near .
So take your last breath .
Listen , listen to what I say : whoever strikes first , I'll run him through with my sword , as sure as I'm a soldier .
That's an oath of great power , and our fury must subside .
That's enough .
I swear , he'll be food for the crows soon .
The king has broken his heart .
Good husband , come home soon .
Come on , can I get you two to make up ?
Let rivers flood and fiends howl for food !
Are you going to pay the eight shillings I won from you in a bet ?
Paying debts is for peasants .
I'm going to take it from you now .
We'll see , won't we ?
Do your best .
By this sword , I'll kill whichever one of you makes the first thrust .
By this sword , I will .
By this sword" is an oath , and oaths must be kept .
Come on , put it away .
In cash .
Well , then , that's how it is .
If you ever had a mother , come in quickly to Sir John .
The poor thing , he is so shaken with a fever that it's terrible to see .
Sweet men , come to him .
And , as the speaker of any prologue should , I ask you to hear our play courteously and to judge it kindly .
Nym , what you say is true .
He has his moods and his ways .
How smooth and cool they seem !
Just as if they were perfectly loyal and faithful .
The king has been informed of all their plans , but they have no idea .
Now that the wind is favorable , let's board the ship .
My Lord of Cambridge and my good Lord of Masham and you , my noble knight , what do you think ?
Will our army cut a swath through the fighting force of France , achieving and accomplishing everything I've assembled them to do ?
No doubt it will , my liege , if each man does his best .
I have no doubt about that , since I know there isn't a man among us who isn't with me wholeheartedly , or a soul left behind who doesn't wish us success and conquest .
There never was a monarch better feared and loved than yourself , your Majesty .
I don't think there's a single unhappy subject living under the protection of your government .
True .
Those who were bitter enemies of your father in his time have turned their bitterness to sweetness , serving you loyally and wholeheartedly .
Yes , I have great cause to be thankful .
Uncle of Exeter , release the man who was arrested yesterday for railing against me .
That's merciful but a bit careless .
Oh , let us be merciful anyway .
And now , let's turn to our business with the French .
Who are the new commissioners ?
I am one , my lord .
Your Highness told me to ask for my commission today .
You told me to do the same , my liege .
And me , too , my royal sovereign .
I confess my crime and throw myself on your Highness's mercy .
To which we all appeal .
The mercy that was alive in me a moment ago was smothered and killed by your own advice .
Though the truth of your treachery is as plain as black on white , I can scarcely believe it , it's so past understanding .
All other devils who tempt people to treason patch together some motive , put together from shreds
and patches of righteousness .
But the devil that tempted you gave you no reason why you should commit treason other than to win the name of traitor .
The demon who seduced you could stride the world over with the proud gait of a lion , could return to hell and tell the devil's legions , "I will never win another soul as easily as I won that Englishman's." How you have poisoned my faith in people !
Why , so did you .
Why , so did you .
Do they come from good families ?
Why , so did you .
Do they seem religious ?
Why , so did you .
That's how sound a man you appeared .
Your fall has left a blot that opens even the best and brightest to suspicion .
This treachery of yours is like the second
Richard Earl of Cambridge , I arrest you for high treason .
Henry Lord Scroop of Masham , I arrest you for high treason .
Thomas Grey , knight , of Northumberland , I arrest you for high treason .
I regret my crime more than my death , and I beg your Highness to forgive me , while punishing my body with death .
But I thank God that I failed in my scheme , and I rejoice in paying the penalty , as I beg God and you to pardon me .
No faithful subject ever rejoiced more at the discovery of most dangerous treason than I now rejoice that I was thwarted in a damnable undertaking .
Pardon my crime , sovereign , but not my person .
May God in His mercy forgive you .
I seek no revenge for myself , but so dearly do I hold the safety of my kingdom , which you sought to destroy , that you must be punished according to her laws .
So go to your deaths , poor miserable wretches , the pain of which may merciful God give you the strength to endure .
I have no doubt that it will be a swift and successful war , since God so graciously exposed this dangerous plot .
I'm now sure that every bump in the road has been removed .
Let's go forth , dear countrymen .
I'll be no king of England if I'm not also king of France .
No , because my manly heart is grieving .
Bardolph , be happy. , Nym , rouse your bragging spirits. , Boy , be brave .
Oh , no , he's surely not in hell .
He's in They say he cried out against sherry .
Yes , he did .
And women .
No , he did not .
He could never bear carnation .
It was a color he never did like .
He once said the devil would get him because of women .
He did touch on women a bit , but his body was aching with fever and he talked about the Whore of Babylon .
Don't you remember how he saw a flea land on Bardolph's nose and said it was a black soul burning in hell ?
Well , the Shall we get moving ?
The king will already have left Southampton .
Look after my goods and possessions .
My lord , this bill that's being proposed is the same one that was proposed in the eleventh year of old King Henry's reign .
Everyone thought it would pass then , and it probably would have had it not been for the great civil unrest and uncertainty of the time , which required the matter to be put off .
But how will we keep it from being passed now , my lord ?
We have to think about that .
If it does pass , the Church will lose more than half of what it possesses , because the bill would strip us of enough real estate left to the church by wealthy , pious men in their wills to support fifteen earls and fifteen hundred knights , six thousand two hundred squires , and a hundred well-supplied almshouses for the relief of lepers , old-age pensioners , the poor , and those too weak or sick to work .
That's what the bill says .
But what can be done to prevent it ?
The king is virtuous and kind .
And a true lover of the holy Church .
I've heard that's not the most nourishing food .
Kiss her soft mouth , and we'll be off .
Farewell , hostess .
Be thrifty .
And keep yourself hidden , I command you .
Farewell .
Adieu .
Therefore the dukes of Berri , Bretagne , Brabant , and Orleans shall advance , and you , Prince Dauphin , will swiftly entrench and fortify our fortress towns with men of courage and the means to defend themselves .
The king of England's approach is as forceful as a whirlpool .
Let's do it with no show of anxiety , no , with no more fear than if we'd heard that the English were busying themselves with folk dancing .
Because , my good king , England is so poorly led , her scepter so foolishly borne by a vain , silly , shallow , impulsive youth , that she's hardly a threat .
Oh , please , Prince Dauphin !
You are completely wrong about this king .
Talk to the ambassadors who've just come back : ask them how majestically he responded to their message , how well supplied he was with good advisors , how restrained in expressing his displeasure , and , moreover , how terrifyingly firm he was in his resolve .
You'll discover that his youthful follies were like the persona that Well , you're wrong , my Lord High Constable .
But even if I thought you were right , it doesn't matter .
When it comes to defense , it's best to assume that the enemy is more powerful than he seems .
crowned by the golden sun , observed his heroic son and smiled to see him mangle the work of nature , French youth whose fathers and God had nurtured for twenty years , since they were babies .
This king is a branch of that same victorious stock .
Ambassadors of Harry , king of England , request a hearing with your Majesty .
We'll see them immediately .
Bring them right in .
My good King , surprise the English and let them know what kind of kingdom you rule over .
Self-love , my liege , is not so great a sin as self-neglect .
From our brother monarch , the king of England ?
And what will happen if I don't ?
Bloodshed will force you to .
I'll think it over .
Tomorrow , I'll let you know what I've decided and what answer you should deliver to the king of England .
Regarding the Dauphin , you can speak to me .
What's the message from the English king ?
Scorn and defiance , indifference , contempt , and any insult that wouldn't disgrace the mighty sender , that's the value he puts on you .
And my king goes on : if your royal father does not sweeten the bitter insult you sent my king and grant all our demands , Henry's artillery will give you so resounding an answer that the very caves and vaulted cathedrals of France shall echo your mocking of him back in your face .
To that end , I presented him with the tennis balls , the perfect expression of his inexperience and frivolity .
He'll make your palace tremble for this insult , even if it were the mightiest in all of Europe .
And , make no mistake , you'll find , as we his subjects have , an amazing difference between the king as a young man and the way he is now .
We'll give you an answer tomorrow .
Don't take too long , unless you want our king to come after me to ask what's holding things up , because he's already landed here .
You'll have your answer soon .
A night isn't much time for addressing matters of this importance .
And so , on the wings of imagination and at the speed of thought , our scene flies swiftly on .
Picture the cabin boys climbing around the rigging .
Hear the shrill whistle that brings order to the hubbub .
Picture the linen sails driven by the invisible and subtle wind as they pull the vast hulls through the wrinkled sea , breasting the high waves .
Pretend that you're standing on the shore , watching a city dance on the shifting waves , and you'll have an idea of the look of this majestic fleet as it holds a straight course for Harfleur .
Follow it , follow it !
Once there , make your thoughts work harder , and witness a siege .
Take in the wheeled canons with their deadly gaping mouths trained on the walled city of Harfleur .
Imagine the French ambassador returning to inform Harry that the king offers him
his daughter , Katherine , with some insignificant , unprofitable dukedoms as her dowry .
Indulge us further and supplement our performance with your own imaginings .
Attack the breach in the city wall once more , dear friends , attack it once more , or else let's close it up with English corpses .
Now grit your teeth and let your nostrils flare .
On , on , you noblest Englishmen , descended as you are from battle-tested fathers , fathers who , like so many Alexander the Greats , have fought in these regions from morning until night , sheathing their swords only when there was no one left to fight .
Don't dishonor your mothers !
Prove that the men you call your fathers did truly conceive you .
And you , good farmers , whose limbs were made in England , show us here the vigor of your upbringing .
Prove you are worthy of your birth , which I do not doubt for a moment .
We are fortunate in the change .
Listen to him talk about war , and you'll hear elegant and thrilling accounts of the battles .
Follow your spirit , and as you charge cry , "God for Harry , England , and Saint George ! "
On , on , on , on , on !
To the breach , to the breach !
Please , corporal , stop !
You can see how it is all around .
I wish I were in an alehouse in London !
I would give all my glory for a mug of ale and safety .
Me too .
Up to the breach , you dogs !
Go !
Great Duke , be merciful to mortal men .
Dear man , calm your rage .
Be lenient , dearest !
This is healthy talk .
Your Honor's is unhealthy talk .
Young though I am , I've been observing these three blowhards closely .
Yet not one among them , if all three were to wait on me , could be my "man , " because three such fakes don't amount to a man .
They will steal anything and call it spoils .
They would like me to be as familiar with men's pockets as their gloves and handkerchiefs , which goes against my manhood , because to take something from another's pocket and put it into my own is plain stealing .
I must leave them and seek some better employment .
Their villainy nauseates me , and I must therefore vomit it up .
The tunnels !
For the enemy , see , and you can explain this to the duke , see , has dug its own tunnels four yards below ours .
By Jesus , I think they will blow up everything if we don't improve our tactics .
The duke of Gloucester , who has command over the siege , is in consultation with an Irishman , a very valiant gentleman indeed .
It's Captain Macmorris , right ?
I think so .
Jesus , he's an ass if there ever was one !
I will say as much to his face .
He knows no more about the proper practice of war , see , the ancient practices , than a puppy .
Here he comes with Captain Jamy , the Scots captain .
Captain Jamy is a wonderfully valorous gentleman , that's certain , one with great learning and knowledge concerning ancient warfare , I happen to know from his maneuvers .
By Jesus , he will defend his position on the practices of the ancient Roman wars as well as any military man in the world .
Good day to you , Captain Fluellen .
Good evening to your Worship , good Captain James .
Tell me , Captain Macmorris , have you left the tunnels ?
Have the excavators stopped work ?
Christ , it's a disaster .
I swear by this hand and my father's soul , the whole thing is a disaster .
It's all stopped .
I could have blown up the town in an hour .
Oh , it's a disaster , a disaster , by this hand , it's a disaster .
Captain Macmorris , I beg your pardon , but would you grant me a discussion or two with you , see , partly touching on or concerning the practice of war , the Roman wars , for the sake of argument , see , and friendly conversation ?
Partly to confirm my opinion and partly for the satisfaction , see , of my mind , with respect to the demands of proper military practice , that's the point ?
What endeavor , Popillius ?
Good luck .
Look , he's approaching Caesar .
Keep an eye on him .
Brutus , what will we do ?
If our secret's known , either Caesar or I will die , for I'll kill myself .
Cassius , stand firm .
Trebonius knows his cue .
Where's Metellus Cimber ?
He should go up and offer his petition to Caesar now .
They're speaking to him .
Go up there and second his petition .
Casca , you'll be the first to raise your hand .
Are we all ready ?
I have to stop you , Cimber .
These kneelings and humble courtesies might excite ordinary men , flattering them into turning Roman law into children's games .
What , even you , Brutus ?
I could be convinced if I were like you .
If I could beg others to change their minds , begging would convince me , too .
But I'm as immovable as the northern star , whose stable and stationary quality has no equal in the sky .
The sky shows countless stars .
So it is on earth .
To show you that that's me , let me prove it a little even in this case .
Enough !
Would you try to lift Mount Olympus ?
Haven't I resisted even Brutus , begging from his knees ?
Hands , speak for me !
Liberty !
Freedom !
Tyranny is dead !
Run and proclaim it in the streets .
Some should go to the public platforms and cry out , "Liberty , freedom , and democracy ! " People and senators , don't be afraid .
Don't run away , stay where you are .
Go to the platform , Brutus .
And Cassius too .
Where's Publius ?
Stand close together , in case someone loyal to Caesar tries to , Don't talk about standing together. , Publius , cheer up .
We don't intend any harm to you , nor to anyone else .
Tell them this , Publius .
And leave us , Publius , in case the people storming us should harm you .
Do so .
And let no one suffer for this deed except us , the perpetrators .
Where's Antony ?
He ran to his house , stunned .
Men , wives , and children stare , cry out , and run in the streets as though it were doomsday .
Why , the man who shortens his life by twenty years cuts off twenty years of worrying about death .
Kneel , Romans , kneel , and let's wash our hands , up to the elbows , in Caesar's blood and smear it on our swords .
Then we'll go out , even to the marketplace , and , waving our bloody swords over our heads , let's cry , "Peace , freedom , and liberty ! " Kneel then , and wash .
Who's calling me ?
Quiet , everyone !
Quiet !
Who in the crowd is calling me ?
I hear a voice more piercing than the music of these trumpets calling "Caesar ! " Speak .
Caesar is listening .
Beware of March 15th .
Who's that ?
A soothsayer tells you to beware of March 15th .
Bring him in front of me .
Let me see his face .
You , fellow , step out of the crowd .
This is Caesar you're looking at .
What do you have to say to me now ?
Speak once again .
Beware of March 15th .
He's insane .
Let's leave him .
Let's move .
Are you going to watch the race ?
How many times will Caesar bleed again in show , though he now lies at the base of Pompey's statue , as worthless as dust !
Yes , every man forward .
Brutus will lead , and we'll follow him with the boldest and best hearts of Rome .
Wait a minute .
Who's that coming ?
It's a friend of Antony's .
Your master is a wise and honorable Roman .
I never thought any less of him .
Tell him , if he comes here , I'll explain everything to him and , on my word , he'll leave unharmed .
I know that he'll be on our side .
But here comes Antony. , Welcome , Mark Antony .
Oh , mighty Caesar !
Do you lie so low ?
Have all your conquests , glories , triumphs , achievements , come to so little ?
Farewell .
Gentlemen , I don't know what you intend to do , who else you intend to kill , who else you consider corrupt .
If it's me , there's no time as good as this hour of Caesar's death , and no weapon better than your swords , covered with the noblest blood in the world .
I ask you , if you have a grudge against me , to kill me now , while your stained hands still reek of blood .
I could live a thousand years and I wouldn't be as ready to die as I am now .
There's no place I'd rather die than here by Caesar , and no manner of death would please me more than being stabbed by you , the masters of this new era .
Oh , Antony , don't beg us to kill you .
They are full of pity for Caesar .
But a stronger pity , for the wrongs committed against Rome , drove out our pity for Caesar , as fire drives out fire , and so we killed him .
For you , our swords have blunt edges , too dull to harm you , Mark Antony .
Our arms , which can be strong and cruel , and our hearts , filled with brotherly love , embrace you with kind love , good thoughts , and reverence .
Your vote will be as strong as anyone's in the reordering of the government .
But just be patient until we've calmed the masses , who are beside themselves with fear .
I don't doubt your wisdom .
Each of you , give me your bloody hand .
Mark Antony , Pardon me , Caius Cassius .
I took your hands in friendship , but , indeed , I was distracted when I looked down at Caesar .
I am friends with you all and love you all , on one condition , that you prove to me that Caesar was dangerous .
Our reasons are so well considered that even if you , Antony , were Caesar's son , you would be satisfied with them .
You may , Mark Antony .
Brutus , may I have a word with you ?
It'll help us more than hurt us .
Mark Antony , take Caesar's body .
You will not blame us in your funeral speech , but will say all the good you want to about Caesar and that you do it by our permission .
And you'll speak on the same platform as I do , after I'm done .
So be it .
I don't want anything more .
Prepare the body , then , and follow us .
You are what's left of the noblest man that ever lived .
Pity the hand that shed this valuable blood .
Over your wounds , which , like speechless mouths , open their red lips , as though to beg me to speak , I predict that a curse will fall upon the bodies of men .
Fierce civil war will paralyze all of Italy .
I do , Mark Antony .
Caesar wrote for him to come to Rome .
He received Caesar's letters , and he is coming .
Grief seems to be contagious , for my eyes , seeing the tears in yours , began to fill .
Is your master coming ?
He rests tonight within twenty-one miles of Rome .
Report back to him fast and tell him what has happened .
Don't go back until I've carried the corpse into the marketplace .
Help me here .
We want answers .
Give us answers .
Then follow me and listen to my speech , friends .
Cassius , go to the next street and divide the crowd .
Let those who will hear me speak stay .
Lead those away who will follow you , and we'll explain publicly the reasons for Caesar's death .
I'll listen to Brutus .
I'll listen to Cassius , and we will compare their reasons .
Noble Brutus has mounted the platform .
Be patient until I finish .
Romans , countrymen , and friends !
Listen to my reasons and be silent so you can hear .
Believe me on my honor and keep my honor in mind , so you may believe me .
Be wise when you criticize me and keep your minds alert so you can judge me fairly .
If there's anyone in this assembly , any dear friend of Caesar's , I say to him that my love for Caesar was no less than his .
If , then , that friend demands to know why I rose up against Caesar , this is my answer : it's not that I loved Caesar less , but that I loved Rome more .
Would you rather that Caesar were living and we would all go to our graves as slaves , or that Caesar were dead and we all lived as free men ?
I weep for Caesar in that he was good to me .
I rejoice in his good fortune .
I honor him for being brave .
But his ambition , for that , I killed him .
There are tears for his love , joy for his fortune , honor for his bravery , and death for his ambition .
Who here is so low that he wants to be a slave ?
If there are any , speak , for it is he whom I've offended .
Who here is so barbarous that he doesn't want to be a Roman ?
If there are any , speak , for it is he whom I've offended .
Who here is so vile that he doesn't love his country ?
If there are any , speak , for it is he whom I have offended .
I will pause for a reply .
No one , Brutus , no one .
Then I have offended no one .
I've done no more to Caesar than you will do to me .
The reasons for his death are recorded in the Capitol .
His glory has not been diminished where he earned it , nor have those offenses for which he was killed been exaggerated .
Here comes his body , mourned by Mark Antony , who , though he had no part in the killing , will benefit from his death , receiving a share in the commonwealth , as you all will .
Live , Brutus !
Live , live !
Let's carry him in triumph to his house !
I don't like sports .
I'm not competitive like Antony .
But don't let me keep you from going , Cassius .
I'll go my own way .
Cassius , don't take it badly .
Tell me , good Brutus , can you see your face ?
Let him become Caesar !
Caesar's better qualities exist in Brutus , and we will crown him .
We'll bring him to his house with shouts and celebration !
My countrymen , Silence !
Brutus speaks .
Quiet there !
Good countrymen , let me leave alone .
I ask that none of you leave , except myself , until Antony has finished .
Let him mount the pulpit .
We'll listen to him .
For Brutus's sake , I am indebted to you .
What does he say about Brutus ?
He says that for Brutus's sake he finds himself indebted to us all .
He'd better not speak badly of Brutus here .
Caesar was a tyrant .
That's for sure .
We're lucky that Rome is rid of him .
Quiet !
Let's hear what Antony has to say .
You gentle Romans , Quiet there !
Let us hear him .
Friends , Romans , countrymen , give me your attention .
I have come here to bury Caesar , not to praise him .
The evil that men do is remembered after their deaths , but the good is often buried with them .
It might as well be the same with Caesar .
The noble Brutus told you that Caesar was ambitious .
If that's true , it's a serious fault , and Caesar has paid seriously for it .
With the permission of Brutus and the others , for Brutus is an honorable man ; they are all honorable men , I have come here to speak at Caesar's funeral .
He was my friend , he was faithful and just to me .
But Brutus says he was ambitious , and Brutus is an honorable man .
He brought many captives home to Rome whose ransoms brought wealth to the city .
Is this the work of an ambitious man ?
When the poor cried , Caesar cried too .
Ambition shouldn't be so soft .
Yet Brutus says he was ambitious , and Brutus is an honorable man .
You all saw that on the Lupercal feast day I offered him a king's crown three times , and he refused it three times .
Was this ambition ?
I am not here to disprove what Brutus has said , but to say what I think there's a lot of sense in what he says .
If you think about it correctly , Caesar has suffered a great wrong .
Has he , sirs ?
Caesar wouldn't take the crown .
Therefore it's certain that he wasn't ambitious .
If it turns out he wasn't , certain people are going to get it .
Poor man !
Antony's eyes are fiery red from crying .
There isn't a nobler man than Antony in all of Rome .
Only yesterday the word of Caesar might have stood against the world .
Now he lies there worth nothing , and no one is so humble as to show him respect .
Oh , sirs , if I stirred your hearts and minds to mutiny and rage , I would offend Brutus and Cassius , who , you all know , are honorable men .
I will not do them wrong .
I would rather wrong the dead , and wrong myself and you , than wrong such honorable men .
But here's a paper with Caesar's seal on it .
If you could only hear this testament , which , excuse me , I don't intend to read aloud , you would kiss dead Caesar's wounds and dip your handkerchiefs in his sacred blood , and beg for a lock of hair to remember him by .
We want to hear the will .
Read it , Mark Antony .
The will , the will !
We want to hear Caesar's will .
It isn't proper for you to know how much Caesar loved you .
You aren't wood , you aren't stones , you're men .
And , being men , the contents of Caesar's will would enrage you .
Read the will .
We want to hear it , Antony .
You have to read us the will , Caesar's will .
Will you be patient ?
Will you wait awhile ?
I've said too much in telling you of it .
I'm afraid that I wrong the honorable men whose daggers have stabbed Caesar .
They were traitors .
The testament !
They were villains , murderers .
The will !
Read the will !
You force me to read the will , then ?
Then make a circle around Caesar's corpse , and let me show you the man who made this will .
Shall I come down ?
Will you let me ?
Come down .
Descend .
We'll let you .
Stand away from the hearse .
Stand away from the body .
Make room for Antony , most noble Antony !
No , don't press up against me .
Stand further away .
Stand back .
Give him room .
If you have tears , prepare to shed them now .
You all know this cloak .
I remember the first time Caesar ever put it on .
It was the day he overcame the Nervii warriors .
Look , here's where Cassius's dagger pierced it .
See the wound that Casca made .
For Brutus , as you know , was Caesar's angel .
The gods know how dearly Caesar loved him !
This was the most unkind cut of all .
And at the base of Pompey's statue , with his cloak covering his face , which was dripping with blood the whole time , great Caesar fell .
Oh , what a fall it was , my countrymen !
Then you and I and all of us fell down , while bloody treason triumphed .
Oh , now you weep , and I sense that you feel pity .
These are gracious tears .
But if it overwhelms you to look at Caesar's wounded cloak , how will you feel , kind men , now ?
Look at this , here is the man , scarred , as you can see , by traitors .
Oh , what a sad sight !
Oh , noble Caesar !
Oh , sad day !
Oh , traitors , villains !
Oh , most bloody sight !
Revenge !
Seek !
Burn !
Set fire !
Kill !
Slay !
Wait , countrymen .
Quiet there !
Listen to the noble Antony .
Those who have done this deed are honorable .
I don't know what private grudges they had that made them do it .
They're wise and honorable , and will no doubt give you reasons for it .
I haven't come to steal your loyalty , friends .
I have neither cleverness nor rhetorical skill nor the authority nor gesture nor eloquence nor the power of speech to stir men up .
I just speak directly .
But if I were Brutus and Brutus were me , then I'd stir you up , and install in each of Caesar's wounds the kind of voice that could convince even stones to rise up and mutiny .
We'll mutiny .
We'll burn Brutus's house .
Let's go , then !
Come , find the conspirators !
Wait , and listen to me , countrymen .
Quiet !
Wait !
Listen to Antony .
Most noble Antony !
Why , friends , you don't even know what you're doing yet .
What has Caesar done to deserve your love ?
Alas , you don't know .
I must tell you then .
You've forgotten the will I told you about .
Yes !
The will !
Let's stay and hear the will !
Most noble Caesar !
We'll revenge his death .
Oh , royal Caesar !
Listen to me patiently .
Quiet , there !
Also , he's left you all his walkways , in his private gardens and newly planted orchards , on this side of the Tiber River .
He's left them to you and to your heirs forever , public pleasures in which you will be able to stroll and relax .
Here was a Caesar !
When will there be another like him ?
We'll burn his body in the holy place and use the brands to set the traitors ' houses on fire .
Take up the body .
We'll start a fire .
Now , let it work .
What's up , my man ?
Sir , Octavius has already arrived in Rome .
Where is he ?
He and Lepidus are at Caesar's house .
I will go straight to visit him .
I ask for him , and he comes .
Fortune is happy today and , in this mood , will give us anything we want .
I heard Octavius say that Brutus and Cassius have ridden like madmen through the gates of Rome .
They probably received warning about how much I stirred up the people .
Take me to Octavius .
That's true .
And it's too bad , Brutus , that you don't have any mirrors that could display your hidden excellence to yourself .
I've heard many of the noblest Romans , next to immortal Caesar , speaking of you , complaining of the tyranny of today's government , and wishing that your eyes were working better .
What dangers are you trying to lead me into , Cassius , that you want me to look inside myself for something that's not there ?
I'll tell you , good Brutus .
And since you know you can see yourself best by reflection , I'll be your mirror and show you , without exaggeration , things inside you that you can't see .
And don't be suspicious of me , noble Brutus .
If I were your average fool , or if I made my feelings for you worthless by making the same promises of friendship to everybody , or if you'd seen me first flattering men , hugging them tightly , and later slandering them behind their backs , or if you hear that I drunkenly declare friendship at banquets with all the rabble , only then , of course , go ahead and assume I'm dangerous .
Why are they shouting ?
I'm afraid the people have made Caesar their king .
Really , are you afraid of that ?
Then I have to assume you don't want him to be king .
I dreamed last night that I feasted with Caesar , and unlucky signs overwhelmed my imagination .
I have no desire to go outside , yet something leads me there .
What's your name ?
Where are you going ?
Where do you live ?
Are you a married man or a bachelor ?
Answer all of us , now .
Yes , and be brief .
Yes , and be wise .
What's my name ?
Where am I going ?
Where do I live ?
Am I a married man or a bachelor ?
Then , to answer every man briefly , wisely , and truthfully , wisely I say , I am a bachelor .
You imply that married men are fools .
You'll get a blow from me for that , I think .
Right this instant , I'm going to Caesar's funeral .
As a friend or an enemy ?
As a friend .
Getting right to the point , I live near the Capitol .
Tell us your name , sir , truthfully .
Truthfully , my name is Cinna .
Tear him to pieces .
He's a conspirator .
I'm not Cinna the conspirator .
It doesn't matter .
His name's Cinna .
Pull only his name out of his heart and let him go .
Tear him apart , tear him up !
Come , firebrands , over here !
To Brutus's , to Cassius's , let's burn them all .
Some of you go to Decius's house and some to Casca's .
Some to Ligarius's .
Go !
These ones , then , will be assassinated .
Their names are marked .
I agree , Put a mark next to his name too , Antony .
On the condition that your sister's son , Publius , also must die , Mark Antony .
He will die .
See , I've sealed his fate with this mark next to his name .
But , Lepidus , go to Caesar's house .
Bring his will here , and we'll figure out a way to reduce his bequests to the people .
Will you be here when I return ?
Either here or at the Capitol .
He's an unremarkable man , fit only to be sent on errands .
Does it really make sense , once we divide the world into three parts , that he should be one of the three rulers ?
Octavius , I'm older than you are .
And although we're giving these honors to this man so that he shares some of the blame for what we're doing , he'll carry these honors like a jackass carries gold , groaning and sweating under the load , either led or pushed , as we direct him .
Once he's carried our treasure where we want it , we'll free him of the load and turn him loose like a jackass , to shake his ears and graze in the public pastures .
You can do what you want , but he's an experienced and honorable soldier .
So is my horse , Octavius , and for that reason I give him all the hay he wants .
Stop .
Pass on the command to halt !
What's happening now , Lucillius ?
Is Cassius nearby ?
He's nearby , and Pindarus has come to salute you on behalf of his master .
If he's nearby , I want an explanation .
Can I have a word with you , Lucillius ?
He received me with courtesy and sufficient respect , but not with affection , nor with as much open and friendly conversation as he once greeted me .
You've described a warm friend who's cooling off .
Plain and simple loyalty doesn't make anyone act phony .
But insincere men , like horses who are too lively at the start of a race , make a big show of their spirit .
But when push comes to shove , they droop like those horses that are all show and slow to a crawl .
Is his army approaching ?
They plan to spend the night in Sardis .
The larger part , the main body of cavalry , are coming with Cassius .
Look !
He's arrived .
March to meet him at a dignified pace .
Halt .
Halt !
Pass the order along .
Halt !
Halt !
Halt !
Most noble brother , you have done me wrong .
Let the gods judge me !
Do I mistreat even my enemies ?
And when you do , Cassius , calm down .
Let's not argue here in front of both our armies , which ought to see nothing but love between us .
Order them to move back .
Then , in my tent , you can elaborate on your complaints , and I'll listen .
Pindarus , order our commanders to lead their charges a little ways away from this ground .
Have Lucius and Titinius guard the door .
My evidence that you have wronged me is that you condemned and disgraced Lucius Pella for taking bribes here from the Sardinians , and you ignored my letters , where I argued that he was innocent ; I know the man .
You wronged yourself to write on behalf of such a man .
In a time like this , it doesn't make sense to criticize every offense .
I'll tell you , Cassius , you yourself have been called greedy and been accused of giving your positions to undeserving men in exchange for gold .
Me , "greedy" !
You know , if you were anyone other than Brutus , that speech would be your last .
The name of Cassius gives credit to these corrupt actions , and so they go unpunished .
Unpunished !
Remember March , March 15th .
Didn't great Caesar bleed for the sake of justice ?
Who among us stabbed him for any cause but justice ?
Should we now dirty our fingers with lowly bribes and sell the mighty offices that we hold for whatever money we can get our hands on ?
I'd rather be a dog and howl at the moon than be that kind of Roman .
Brutus , do not provoke me .
I will not take it .
You're forgetting yourself when you back me into a corner .
I'm a soldier , more experienced than you , and better able to give orders .
Get lost !
You are not , Cassius .
I am .
I say you're not .
Don't provoke me any further or I'll forget to restrain myself .
If you care about your health , you won't push me any further .
Leave , you little man .
Is this possible ?
Listen to me , for I have something to tell you .
Does a madman scare me when he stares at me ?
But why do you keep me here so long ?
What do you want to tell me ?
I know this quality in you , Brutus , it's as familiar to me as your face .
Indeed , honor is what I want to talk to you about .
I don't know what you and other men think of this life , but as for me , I'd rather not live at all than live to worship a man as ordinary as myself .
I was born as free as Caesar .
So were you .
We both have eaten as well , and we can both endure the cold winter as well as he .
Once , on a cold and windy day , when the river Tiber was crashing against its banks , Caesar said to me , "Cassius , I dare you to jump into this rough water with me and swim to that point there." As soon as he spoke , though I was fully dressed , I plunged in and called for him to follow .
And he did .
But before we reached the end point , Caesar cried , "Help me , Cassius , or I will sink ! " And just as Aeneas , the hero who founded Rome , emerged from the fires of Troy with his elderly father Anchises on his shoulder , so I emerged from the Tiber carrying the tired Caesar .
All this" ?
Yes , and more .
Go ahead , rage till your proud heart breaks .
Show your slaves how mad you are , and make your servants tremble .
Has it come to this ?
You say you're a better soldier .
Show it !
Make your boasts come true , and I'll be thrilled .
I'm always happy to hear about brave men .
You wrong me in every way .
You wrong me , Brutus .
When Caesar was alive , even he wouldn't dare anger me like this .
Oh , be quiet .
You wouldn't have dared to tempt him so .
I wouldn't have dared !
No .
You wouldn't have dared , out of fear for your life .
Don't take my love for granted .
I might do something I'll be sorry for .
You've already done something you should be sorry for .
Your threats don't scare me , Cassius , because I'm so secure in my honesty and integrity that they pass me by like a weak breeze .
I asked you for gold to pay my soldiers , and you wouldn't give it to me .
Was that the Caius Cassius that I knew ?
And would I have ever done that to you ?
I didn't refuse you .
You did .
I didn't .
The man who brought my answer to you was a fool .
You have broken my heart .
A friend should put up with his friend's weaknesses , but you exaggerate mine .
I don't until you practice them on me .
You don't love me .
I don't like your faults .
A friend would never see those faults .
No , a flatterer wouldn't , even if the faults were as huge as Mount Olympus .
Oh , I could weep my soul right out of myself !
There's my dagger Put away your dagger .
Be angry whenever you like , it's all right with me .
Do whatever you want , and I'll say your insults are just a bad mood .
When I said that , I was angry too .
You admit it , then ?
Give me your hand .
And my heart too .
Oh , Brutus !
What's the matter ?
Do you have enough love for me to be patient when my bad temper , which I inherited from my mother , makes me forget how I should behave ?
Yes , Cassius .
And from now on , when you get hot with me , I'll assume it's your mother speaking and leave it at that .
What's this !
What's the matter ?
You should be ashamed , generals !
What do you think you're doing ?
Love each other and be friends , like two such men should be .
Listen to me , because I'm older than you , surely .
Be patient with him , Brutus .
That's just how he is .
I'll humor him when he learns how to behave .
What should we do with all these rhyming fools that follow us from post to post ?
Get out of here , my friend .
Away , away , be gone .
Lucillius and Titinius , order the commanders to have the men camp for the night .
And return to us immediately , bringing Messala with you .
I didn't think you could even be so angry .
Oh Cassius , I'm tired out by many sorrows .
Portia is dead .
Portia !
She is dead .
What an irreplaceable and grievous loss !
What sickness did she die of ?
She was worried about my absence , and about the fact that young Octavius and Mark Antony have grown so strong , which I found out at the same time as the news of her death .
And that's how she died ?
Yes , like that .
Oh , immortal gods !
My heart is thirsty for that noble promise .
Fill my cup , Lucius , until the wine overflows it .
I can not drink too much of Brutus's love .
Now let's sit closely around this candle and discuss our needs .
Portia , are you really gone ?
No more about that , please .
Messala , I have received these letters explaining that young Octavius and Mark Antony are rushing toward Philippi and bearing down upon us with a mighty power .
I have received letters that say the same .
And anything else ?
That with a series of legal writs , Octavius , Antony , and Lepidus have put a hundred senators to death .
On that point , our letters don't agree .
My letters say only seventy senators were killed , one being Cicero .
Cicero too ?
Cicero is dead , by their decree .
No , Messala .
And you haven't heard any news about her in your letters ?
Nothing , Messala .
I think that's strange .
Why do you ask ?
Have you heard something of her in your letters ?
No , my lord .
Now , as you're a Roman , tell me the truth .
Then you must take the truth I have to tell like a Roman .
It's certain that she is dead , and she died in a strange way .
Well , good-bye , Portia .
We all must die , Messala .
Having already thought about the fact that she would have to die sometime , I can endure her death now .
That's the way great men ought to endure great losses .
I've practiced Stoicism with as much devotion as you , but I still couldn't bear this news like you do .
Well , let's move on to our work with the living .
What do you think of marching to Philippi immediately ?
I don't think it's a good idea .
Why not ?
Here's why : it'd be better for the enemy to come after us .
That way , he'll waste his provisions and tire out his soldiers , weakening his own capacities , while we , lying still , are rested , energetic , and nimble .
If we meet him at Philippi , these people will be at our backs .
Listen to me , good brother .
Our regiments are full to the brim ; our cause is ready .
The enemy gets larger each day .
We , now at our largest , can only decrease .
It's on such a high tide that we're now floating , and we must take the current when it is offered , or lose our campaign .
If that's what you want , all right .
We'll go forward with you and meet them at Philippi .
It's now late at night , and actions must accommodate bodily needs , which we'll satisfy with only a short rest .
That's all there is to say .
There's nothing else .
Good night .
We'll rise and leave early tomorrow .
Lucius !
Let's pray that we never come into conflict like that again .
Let's not , Brutus .
And this is the man who has now become a god , and I'm a wretched creature who must bow down if Caesar so much as carelessly nods my way .
In Spain , Caesar had a fever , and it made him shake .
It's true , this so-called "god" , he shook .
His cowardly lips turned white , and the same eye whose gaze terrifies the world lost its gleam .
I heard him groan , yes , I did , and the same tongue that ordered the Romans to obey him and transcribe his speeches in their books cried , "Give me some water , Titinius , " like a sick girl .
It astounds me that such a weak man could beat the whole world and carry the trophy of victory alone .
More shouting !
I think this applause is for some new honors awarded to Caesar .
Why , Caesar straddles the narrow world like a giant , and we petty men walk under his huge legs and look forward only to dying dishonorably , as slaves .
Men can be masters of their fate .
It is not destiny's fault , but our own faults , that we're slaves .
Brutus" and "Caesar." What's so special about "Caesar" ?
Why should that name be proclaimed more than yours ?
Write them together , yours is just as good a name .
Pronounce them , it is just as nice to say .
Everything's fine .
Good night , my lord .
Good night , good brother .
Good night , Lord Brutus .
Farewell , everyone .
Give me the gown .
Where's your lute ?
Here in the tent .
What , are you sleepy ?
Call Claudio and some of my other men .
I'll have them sleep on cushions in my tent .
Varrus and Claudio !
Did you call , my lord ?
Sirs , I ask you to sleep in my tent .
I might wake you up in a while to send you on an errand to my brother Cassius .
If you like , we'll stand by and wait to do whatever you need .
Look , Lucius , here's the book I was searching for .
I put it in the pocket of my nightgown .
I was sure that you hadn't given it to me .
Can you stay awake a bit longer and play a few tunes on your lute ?
Yes , my lord , if you would like .
I would , my boy .
I ask too much of you , but you're always willing .
It's my duty , sir .
I shouldn't make you do more than you're able .
I know that young men look forward to their rest .
I've already slept , my lord .
That was good planning , and you'll sleep some more .
I won't keep you very long .
If I live through this , I'll be good to you .
This is a sleepy tune .
Gentle boy , good night .
I won't trouble you so much as to wake you .
Good night , good boy .
Let me see , let me see .
Didn't I turn down the page where I left off reading ?
Here it is , I think .
I think it's my bad eyesight that's making me see this horrible vision .
It's coming toward me .
Are you a god , an angel , or a devil , that you make my blood turn cold and my hair stand up ?
Tell me what you are .
I'm your evil spirit , Brutus .
Why do you come here ?
To tell you that you'll see me at Philippi .
Then I'll see you again ?
Yes , at Philippi .
Alright , then I'll see you at Philippi .
Evil spirit , I want to talk some more .
Claudio !
Claudio !
He thinks he's still playing his instrument .
Lucius , wake up !
My lord ?
Were you dreaming , Lucius ?
My lord , I don't think I cried out .
Yes , you did .
Did you see anything ?
Nothing , my lord .
My lord ?
My lord ?
Why did you cry out in your sleep ?
Did we , my lord ?
Yes .
Did you see anything ?
No , my lord , I didn't see anything .
Me neither , my lord .
Go to my brother Cassius .
Order him to advance his forces first thing , and we'll follow .
Yes , my lord .
Now , Antony , our prayers have been answered .
You said the enemy wouldn't come down but keep to the hills and upper regions .
It seems not .
Their forces are nearby .
They intend to challenge us here at Philippi , responding to our challenge before we've even challenged him .
I know how they think , and I understand why they're doing this .
They really wish they were somewhere else , but they want to descend on us , looking fierce so we'll think they're brave .
But they aren't .
Prepare yourselves , generals .
The enemy approaches with great display .
They show their bloody heralds of battle , and something must be done immediately .
Octavius , lead your forces slowly out to the left side of the level field .
I'll go to the right side .
You stay on the left .
Why are you defying me in this urgent matter ?
They want to talk .
Stay here , Titinius .
We have to go out and talk to them .
Mark Antony , should we give the signal to attack ?
No , Octavius Caesar , we'll respond to their charge .
Go forward .
The generals want to speak with us .
Words before fighting .
Is that how it is , countrymen ?
Not that we love words more than fighting , like you do .
Good words are better than bad strokes , Octavius .
Brutus , you give a nice speech along with your evil strokes .
But your words are as sweet as honey , you've stolen from the bees and left them with nothing .
I took their stings too , wouldn't you say ?
Villains , you didn't do even that much when your vile daggers struck each other as they hacked up Caesar's sides .
Now , Brutus , you have only yourself to thank .
Come , come , let's remember why we're here .
If arguing makes us sweat , the real trial will turn that water to blood .
Caesar , you're not going to be killed by a traitor , unless you kill yourself..
I hope you're right .
I wasn't born to die on your sword .
If you were the noblest of your family , young man , you couldn't die more honorably .
An annoying schoolboy , unworthy of such an honor , joined by a masquerader and a partier !
Still the same old Cassius !
If you dare to fight today , come to the field .
If not , come when you have the courage .
Now let the wind blow , waves swell , and ships sink !
The storm has begun and everything is at stake .
Messala !
Messala , today is my birthday , I was born on this very day .
Give me your hand , Messala .
You'll be my witness that I've been forced , as Pompey was , to wager all of our freedoms on one battle .
You know that I used to believe in Epicurus and his disregard for omens .
I've changed my mind now and partly believe in omens .
Traveling from Sardis , two mighty eagles fell on our front flag and perched there , eating from the hands of the soldiers who'd accompanied us to Philippi .
This morning , they've flown away and in their place are ravens , crows , and kites , flying over our heads and looking down on us , as though we were sickly prey .
Their shadows are like a deadly canopy , under which our army lies , ready to die .
Don't believe in this .
I only partly believe it , for I'm enthusiastic and resolved to meet all dangers without wavering .
Now , most noble Brutus , the gods are friendly with us today so that we , who want peace , can live on to old age !
But since the affairs of men are always uncertain , let's think about the worst that may happen .
If we lose this battle , this is the last time we'll speak to each other .
If we lose , what do you plan to do ?
Cast spells with them , and "Brutus" will call up a ghost as well as "Caesar." Now , in the name of all the gods , I ask you what food does Caesar eat that has made him grow so great ?
Our era should be ashamed !
Rome has lost the ability to raise noble men !
When was there ever an age , since the beginning of time , that didn't feature more than one famous man ?
Until now , no one could say that only one man mattered in all of vast Rome .
Now , though , in all of Rome , there's room for only one man .
You and I have heard our fathers talk of another Brutus , your ancestor , who would've let the devil himself reign in his Roman Republic before he let a king rule .
I have no doubt that you love me .
I'm beginning to understand what you want me to do .
What I think about this , and about what's happening here in Rome , I'll tell you later .
For now , don't try to persuade me anymore , I ask you as a friend .
I'll think over what you've said , I'll listen patiently to whatever else you have to say , and I'll find a good time for us to discuss further such weighty matters .
Until then , my noble friend , think about this : I'd rather be a poor villager than call myself a citizen of Rome under the hard conditions that this time is likely to put us through .
I'm glad that my weak words have provoked even this small show of protest from you .
Then if we lose this battle , you'll be willing to be led in chains through the streets of Rome ?
No , Cassius , no .
Don't imagine that I'll ever allow myself to return to Rome in chains .
My mind is too great for that .
Therefore , accept my everlasting farewell .
Forever and forever , farewell , Cassius !
If we meet again , then we'll smile .
If not , then this parting was well done .
Forever and forever , farewell , Brutus !
If we meet again , then we'll smile indeed .
If not , it's true , this parting was well done .
Well , lead on .
Oh , I wish I could know what will happen today before it happens !
But it's enough to know that the day will end , and then the end will be known .
Let's go !
Ride , ride , Messala , ride , and give these dispatches to our forces on the other side .
They should advance immediately , because I sense Octavius's side is a bit fainthearted right now , and a sudden push would overthrow him .
Ride , ride , Messala .
I've become an enemy to my own soldiers !
Oh , Cassius , Brutus gave the orders too soon .
Retreat further , my lord , retreat further .
Mark Antony is in your tents , my lord .
Therefore you must run , noble Cassius .
Are those my tents on fire ?
They are , my lord .
Titinius , if you love me , get on your horse and spur him on until he's brought you to those troops and back again , so that I can find out whether those troops are friends or enemies .
I'll be back quicker than you can think a thought .
Go , Pindarus , climb a little higher on this hill .
My eyesight has always been bad .
Watch Titinius and tell me what you see in the field .
Today was the day I breathed my first breath .
Time has come round , and I'll end where I began .
My life has run its circle .
What news ?
And listen !
They shout for joy .
Come down , look no more .
Oh , I'm such a coward for living long enough to see my best friend taken before my eyes !
Come here , boy .
Come now , keep your oath .
Caesar , you are revenged with the very same sword that killed you .
So I'm free .
But I didn't want to be free like this .
Oh , Cassius , I'll run far from this country to where no Romans can find me .
The armies have merely changed places , Titinius , because Octavius has been overthrown by noble Brutus's forces at the very moment that Antony overthrew Cassius's legions .
This news will comfort Cassius .
Where did you leave him ?
On this hill and in despair , with his slave Pindarus .
Isn't that him on the ground ?
He doesn't seem to be alive .
Oh , my heart !
Isn't that him ?
Pindarus !
Where are you , Pindarus ?
Look for him , Titinius , while I go to meet the noble Brutus and force him to hear this news .
I say "force" because Brutus would rather I stuck sharp blades and poisoned arrows in his ears than fill them with this .
Hurry , Messala , and I'll look for Pindarus in the meantime .
Why did you send me out , brave Cassius ?
Didn't I meet up with your allies ?
And didn't they place the wreath of victory on my brow and order me to give it to you ?
Didn't you hear their shouts ?
Alas , you misunderstood everything !
But let me place this wreath on your head .
Your Brutus ordered me to give it to you , and I'll do what he says .
Where is his body , Messala ?
Over there , where Titinius mourns it .
Titinius is lying face-up .
He's been killed .
Oh , Julius Caesar , you are still powerful .
Your ghost walks the earth and turns our swords toward our own stomachs .
Could you have found two Romans as good as these two ?
Good-bye to you , the last of all the Romans .
I will find the time to cry for you , Cassius , I'll find the time .
Come , then , and send his body to Thasos .
Let's proceed to the field .
Labio and Flavio , push our armies onward .
It is three o'clock , and , Romans , before night , we will try our luck in a second battle .
Who is so low that he wouldn't ?
Who will advance with me ?
I will proclaim my name around the field .
I am the son of Marcus Cato !
An enemy to tyrants and a friend to my country .
I am the son of Marcus Cato !
And I am Brutus , Marcus Brutus .
Brutus , my country's friend .
Know that I am Brutus !
Oh , young and noble Cato , have you been slain ?
I'd rather die .
Here is some money for you to kill me immediately .
Kill Brutus and be honored by the killing .
We must not .
He is a noble prisoner !
Make room !
Tell Antony that Brutus has been taken .
I'll tell him the news .
Where is he ?
He's safe , Antony .
I can assure you that no enemy will ever take the noble Brutus alive .
The gods protect him from so great a shame !
The games are done and Caesar is returning .
As they pass by , grab Casca by the sleeve , and he'll tell you if anything important happened today , in his usual sour way .
I'll do so .
But look , Cassius , Caesar looks angry and everyone else looks as if they've been scolded .
Calphurnia's face is pale , and Cicero's eyes are as red and fiery as they get when senators are arguing with him at the Capitol .
Casca will tell us what's the matter .
Antonio !
Caesar ?
Come , last of my friends , rest on this rock .
Statilius waved the torchlight at us , but he hasn't come back .
He's been captured or killed .
Sit down , Clitus .
Listen , Clitus .
Who , me , my lord ?
No , not for all the world .
Silence , then !
Don't give it away .
I'd rather kill myself .
Listen , Dardanius .
Would I dare do something like that ?
Oh Dardanius !
Oh Clitus !
Come here , good Volumnius .
Listen a minute .
What is it , my lord ?
Once at Sardis and once last night , here in Philippi fields .
I know that my hour has come .
No , it hasn't , my lord .
No , I'm sure it has , Volumnius .
You see how the world goes , Volumnius .
Our enemies have driven us to the edge of the grave .
It's nobler to leap in ourselves than dawdle until they push us .
Good Volumnius , you know that we went to school together .
For the sake of our old friendship , I ask you , hold my sword handle while I run on it .
That's not a job for a friend , my lord .
Run , run , my lord .
We can't wait here .
Farewell to you , and you , and you , Volumnius .
Strato , you've slept this whole time .
I'll have glory in this losing day , more than Octavius and Mark Antony will gain by their foul conquest .
So farewell , all , for my tongue has almost finished with its life .
I can't see ahead of me .
My bones want to rest after helping me up to this hour .
Run , my lord , run .
Go on !
I'll follow .
I beg you , Strato , stay by me .
You're a man with a good reputation .
Your life has had honor in it .
Then , hold my sword and turn your face away while I run on it .
Will you , Strato ?
Give me your hand , first .
Farewell , good Strato .
What man is that ?
Free from the bondage you are in , Messala .
I'll take all who served Brutus into my service .
You , will you join with me ?
Yes , if Messala recommends me to you .
Do so , good Messala .
How did my master die , Strato ?
I held the sword and he ran on it .
Then take this man into your service , Octavius , for he did the final service to my master .
This was the noblest Roman of them all .
All the rest of the conspirators acted out of jealousy of great Caesar .
Only he acted from honesty and for the general good .
His life was gentle , and the elements mixed so well in him that Nature might stand up and say to all the world , "This was a man." Let's treat him according to his virtue , with all the respect and rituals of burial .
His body will lie in my tent tonight , with the honorable observance that suits a soldier .
So order the armies to rest , and let's go home to share the glories of this happy day .
Yes , Casca .
Tell us what happened today that put Caesar in such a serious mood .
But you were with him , weren't you ?
If I were , I wouldn't need to ask you what happened .
A crown was offered to him , and he pushed it away with the back of his hand , like this , and then the people started shouting .
What was the second noise for ?
The same thing .
They shouted three times .
What was the last cry for ?
For the same thing .
The crown was offered to him three times ?
Yes , indeed , it was , and he pushed it away three times , each time more gently than the last ; and at each refusal my countrymen shouted .
Who offered him the crown ?
Antony .
Tell us how it happened , noble Casca .
I can't explain it .
I saw Mark Antony offer him a crown , though it wasn't a real crown , just a small circlet , and , as I told you , he refused it once , though in my opinion he would've liked to have it .
Then Antony offered it to him again , and he refused it again ( though , in my opinion , he was reluctant to take his hand off it ) .
Then Antony offered it the third time .
As for myself , I didn't dare laugh , for fear of opening my lips and inhaling the stinking air .
But wait a minute , please .
Did you say Caesar fainted ?
He fell down in the marketplace and foamed at the mouth and was speechless .
That's very likely .
He has epilepsy , a disease where you fall down .
No , Caesar doesn't have epilepsy .
You and I , and honest Casca , we have epilepsy , we've fallen .
I don't know what you mean by that , but I'm sure Caesar fell down .
What did he say when he regained consciousness ?
Indeed , before he fell down , when he realized the commoners were glad he refused the crown , he pulled open his robe and offered them his throat to cut .
If I'd been a common laborer and hadn't taken him up on his offer , to hell with me .
And so he fainted .
When he regained consciousness again , he said that if he'd done or said anything wrong , he wanted them to know that it was all because of his sickness .
Three or four women near me cried , "Alas , good soul ! " and forgave him with all their hearts .
But never mind them , if Caesar had stabbed their mothers , they would've forgiven him .
And after that he came back here looking so serious ?
Yes .
Get out of here !
Go home , you lazy men .
What , is today a holiday ?
I'm a carpenter , sir .
Where are your leather apron and your ruler ?
What are you doing , wearing your best clothes ?
And you , sir , what's Well , compared to a fine workman , you might call me a mere cobbler .
But what's your trade ?
Answer me straightforwardly .
It is a trade , sir , that I practice with a clear conscience .
What trade , boy ?
You insolent rascal , what trade ?
Sir , please , don't be angry .
But if your soles are worn out , I can mend you .
What do you mean by that ?
Mend" me , you impertinent fellow ?
Did Cicero say anything ?
Yes , he said something in Greek .
What did he say ?
If I told you I understood Greek , I'd be lying .
But those who understood him smiled at one another and shook their heads .
As for myself , it was Greek to me .
I have more news too .
Murellus and Flavius have been punished for pulling scarves off statues of Caesar .
There you go .
There was even more foolishness , if I could only remember it .
Will you have dinner with me tonight , Casca ?
No , I have a commitment .
Will you dine with me tomorrow ?
Yes , if I'm still alive , and you're still sane , and your dinner is worth eating .
Good .
I'll expect you .
Do so .
Farewell to you both .
What a stupid man he's become !
He was so sharp when he was in school .
He's still sharp when it comes to carrying out a bold or noble enterprise , though he puts on this show of stupidity .
He speaks roughly , but what he says is smart , and his roughness makes other people enjoy listening to him .
You're right , that's how it is .
I'll leave you for now .
If you'd like to talk tomorrow , I'll come to your home .
Or , if you don't mind , come to my home , and I'll wait for you .
I'll do so .
Until then , think about the well-being of Rome .
Well , Brutus , you're noble .
Caesar resents me , but he loves Brutus .
If I were Brutus now and Brutus were me , I wouldn't have let him influence me .
Tonight I'll throw through his window a few letters in different handwriting , as if they came from several citizens , all testifying to the great respect Romans have for Brutus , and all alluding to Caesar's unseemly ambition .
Did you accompany Caesar home ?
Cicero , I've seen storms in which the angry winds split old oak trees , and I've seen the ocean swell , rage , and foam , as if it wanted to reach the storm clouds , but never before tonight , never until now , have I experienced a storm that drops fire .
Either there are wars in heaven , or else the world , too insolent toward the gods , provokes them to send destruction .
Also , I've kept my sword unsheathed since I saw this , in front of the Capitol I met a lion who looked at me and strutted by without bothering to attack me .
And there were a hundred spooked women huddled together in fear who swore they saw men on fire walk up and down the streets .
And yesterday the night owl sat hooting and shrieking in the marketplace at noon .
When all these extraordinary things happen at once , we shouldn't say , "These happenings can be explained rationally .
They're natural enough." I think these things are omens of things to come in our country .
Indeed , it's a strange time .
But men tend to interpret things however suits them and totally miss the actual meaning of the things themselves .
Is Caesar visiting the Capitol tomorrow ?
He is , because he told Antonius to tell you he'd be there tomorrow .
Good night then , Casca .
This bad weather isn't good to walk around in .
A Roman .
It's Casca , I know your voice .
Your ear is good .
Cassius , what a night this is !
It's a very pleasing night to honest men .
Who ever saw the heavens threaten like this ?
Those who have known how bad things are here on earth .
I have walked around the streets , exposing myself to the perilous night , unbuttoned like this , as you see , Casca , baring my chest to the thunderbolt .
When the forked blue lightning seemed to break open the sky , I put myself right where I thought it would hit .
But why did you tempt the heavens like that ?
Mankind's role is to fear and tremble when the almighty gods send warning signals .
You're acting stupid , Casca , and you lack the quick wits that a Roman should have , or else you don't use them .
You go pale , you stare , and you act in awe of the strange disturbance in the heavens .
A man no mightier than you or I in ability , yet grown as huge and frightening as tonight's strange happenings .
Let it be who it is .
Our tolerance for slavery and oppression shows us to be weak , like women .
Indeed , they say that the senators plan to establish Caesar as a king tomorrow , and he'll wear his crown at sea and on land everywhere except here in Italy .
I know where I'll wear this dagger , then .
I'll kill myself to save myself from slavery .
In suicide , gods make the weak strong .
In suicide , gods allow tyrants to be defeated .
No stony tower , no brass walls , no airless dungeon , no iron chains can contain a strong mind .
But if a man becomes weary of these obstacles , he can always kill himself .
Let everyone beware : I can shake off the tyranny that now oppresses me whenever I choose .
So can I .
In fact , every imprisoned man holds in his own hand the tool to free himself .
How can Caesar be a tyrant then ?
Poor man !
I know he wouldn't be a wolf if the Romans didn't act like sheep .
He couldn't be a lion if the Romans weren't such easy prey .
People who want to start a big fire quickly start with little twigs .
But , oh no !
What have I said in my grief ?
Say no more .
Shake my hand .
If you're joining together to right these wrongs , I'll go as far as any one of you .
That's a deal .
Now let me tell you , Casca , I have already convinced some of the noblest Romans to join me in an honorable but dangerous mission .
And I know that by now they're waiting for me on the porch outside Pompey's theater .
It's Cinna .
I recognize his walk .
To find you .
Who's that ?
Metellus Cimber ?
No , it's Casca , someone who's going to work with us .
Aren't the others waiting for me , Cinna ?
I'm glad Casca is with us .
What a fearful night this is !
Two or three of us have seen strange things .
Are the others waiting ?
Tell me .
Yes , they are .
Oh , Cassius , if you could only convince Brutus to join us , Don't worry .
Good Cinna , take this paper and be sure to lay it in the judge's chair where Brutus sits , so he'll find it .
When you've finished all this , return to the porch of Pompey's theater , where you'll find us .
Are Decius Brutus and Trebonius there ?
Everyone's there except Metellus Cimber , and he's gone to look for you at your house .
Well , I'll hurry and put these papers where you told me .
When you've finished , go back to Pompey's theater .
Come on , Casca , you and I will go see Brutus at his house before sunrise .
Yes , you're absolutely right about how worthy Brutus is and how much we need him .
Let's go , because it's already after midnight , and we want him on our side before daylight .
Wake up , I say !
Lucius !
Did you call me , my lord ?
Put a candle in my study , Lucius .
Call me when it's lit .
I will , my lord .
I have no personal reason to strike at him , only the best interest of the people .
He wants to be crowned .
The question is , how would being king change him ?
Evil can come from good , just as poisonous snakes tend to come out into the open on bright sunny days , which means we have to walk carefully .
If we crown him , I have to admit we'd be giving him the power to do damage .
Cobble you , sir .
You're a cobbler , are you ?
Sir , I make my living using an awl .
I'm a surgeon to old shoes .
When they're endangered , I save them .
The noblest men who ever walked on leather have walked on my handiwork .
But why aren't you in your shop today ?
Why are you leading these men through the streets ?
Well , to wear out their shoes and get myself more work .
Why would you celebrate it ?
What victory does he bring home ?
What foreign lands has he conquered and captive foreigners chained to his chariot wheels ?
Rulers abuse their power when they separate it from compassion .
Caesar might act like that .
Therefore , in case he does , we must hold him back .
And since our quarrel is with his future behavior , not what he does now , I must frame the argument like this : if his position is furthered , his character will fulfill these predictions .
The candle is burning in your study , sir .
While I was looking for a flint to light it , I found this paper on the window , sealed up like this , and I'm sure it wasn't there when I went to bed .
Go back to bed .
It isn't daybreak yet .
Is tomorrow the 15th of March , boy ?
I don't know , sir .
Check the calendar and come tell me .
I will , sir .
Sir , fifteen days of March have gone by .
Good .
Go to the gate .
Somebody's knocking .
I haven't slept since Cassius first began to turn me against Caesar .
Is he alone ?
Do you know them ?
Let them in .
Oh , conspiracy , are you ashamed to show your face even at night , when evil things are most free ?
If so , when it's day , where are you going to find a cave dark enough to hide your monstrous face ?
Instead , hide your true face behind smiles and friendliness .
I'm afraid we're intruding too boldly on your sleep time .
Good morning , Brutus .
Are we bothering you ?
I've been up all night .
Do I know these men who are with you ?
This is Trebonius .
He's welcome here .
This is Decius Brutus .
He's welcome too .
This is Casca .
This is Cinna .
And this is Metellus Cimber .
They're all welcome .
What worries have kept you awake tonight ?
Can I have a word with you ?
Here's the east .
Won't the dawn come from here ?
No .
You're both wrong .
And let us swear to our resolution .
No , let's not swear an oath .
Then we can let this ambitious tyrant continue unchallenged until each of us is killed at his whim .
But if we have reasons that are strong enough to ignite cowards into action and to make weak women brave , and I think we do , then , countrymen , what else could we possibly need to spur us to action ?
What bond do we need other than that of discreet Romans who have said what they're going to do and won't back down ?
And what oath do we need other than that we honest men have told each other that this will happen or we will die trying ?
Swearing is for priests , cowards , overly cautious men , feeble old people , and those long-suffering weaklings who welcome abuse .
Only men whom you wouldn't trust anyway would swear oaths , and for the worst reasons .
Don't spoil the justness and virtue of our endeavor nor weaken our own irrepressible spirits by thinking that we need a binding oath , when the blood that every noble Roman contains within him would be proven bastard's blood if he broke the smallest part of any promise he had made .
But what about Cicero ?
Should we see what he thinks ?
I think he will stand strong with us .
Let's not leave him out .
No , by no means .
Yes , we should get his support , for his mature presence will make others think well of us and speak out in support of our actions .
They'll assume that Cicero , with his sound judgment , ordered the actions .
No , don't even mention him .
He'll never follow anything that other men have started .
Then leave him out .
Indeed , he's not right for this .
Good point , Decius .
I don't think it would be wise to let Mark Antony , whom Caesar is so fond of , outlive Caesar .
We'd find that he was a dangerous plotter .
And as you know , his connections , if he put them to good use , might be enough to hurt us all .
Our action will seem too bloody if we cut off Caesar's head and then hack at his arms and legs too , Caius Cassius , because Mark Antony is merely one of Caesar's arms .
Let's be sacrificers but not butchers , Caius .
We're all against what Caesar stands for , and there's no blood in that .
Oh , how I wish we could oppose Caesar's spirit , his overblown ambition , and not hack up Caesar himself !
But , unfortunately , Caesar has to bleed if we're going to stop him .
Noble friends , let's kill him boldly but not with anger .
Let's carve him up like a dish fit for the gods , not chop him up like a carcass fit for dogs .
Let's be angry only long enough to do the deed , and then let's act like we're disgusted by what we had to do .
This will make our actions seem practical and not vengeful .
If he loves Caesar , then he can only hurt himself , by grieving and dying for Caesar .
And I'd be surprised if he even did that , for he prefers sports , fun , and friends .
There's nothing to fear in him .
Quiet !
Count how many times the clock chimes .
The clock struck three .
It's time to leave .
It might happen that these strange signs , the unusual terror of this night , and the urgings of his fortune-tellers will keep him away from the Capitol today .
Don't worry about that .
If he's reluctant , I can convince him .
He loves to hear me tell him how men can be snared by flatterers , just like unicorns can be captured in trees , elephants in holes , and lions with nets .
When I tell him he hates flatterers , he agrees , just at the moment when I'm flattering him the most .
Let me work on him .
I can put him in the right mood , and I'll bring him to the Capitol .
No , we'll all go there to bring him .
By eight o'clock .
Is that the latest we can do it ?
Caius Ligarius doesn't like Caesar , who berated him for speaking well of Pompey .
I wonder that none of you thought about getting his support .
Good Metellus , go to him now .
He likes me , and I've given him good reason to .
Just send him here , and I'll persuade him .
The morning is approaching .
We'll leave , Brutus .
Friends , go your separate ways .
But all of you , remember what you've said and prove yourselves true Romans .
Good gentlemen , look like you're rested and happy .
And so , good morning to all of you .
Boy !
Lucius !
Fast asleep ?
Well , enjoy the sweetness of deep sleep .
That's why you sleep so soundly .
Brutus , my lord .
Portia , what are you doing awake ?
It isn't good for your health to expose your weak body to the raw , cold morning .
It's not good for your health , either .
You rudely snuck out of bed .
And last night at dinner , you got up abruptly and paced back and forth with your arms crossed , brooding and sighing , and when I asked you what was the matter , you gave me a dirty look .
I asked you again , and you scratched your head and stamped your foot impatiently .
I still insisted on knowing what the matter was , but you wouldn't answer me , instead giving me an angry wave of your hand and telling me to leave you alone .
My dear lord , tell me what's bothering you .
And now you toss flowers in the path of Caesar , who comes in triumph over Pompey's defeated sons ?
Go home !
Run to your houses , fall on your knees , and pray to the gods to spare you the pain that you deserve for such ingratitude .
Go , go , good countrymen , and to make up for having done wrong , gather up all the poor men like yourselves , lead them to the Tiber , and weep into the river until it overflows its banks .
You go down toward the Capitol , and I'll go this way .
Undress the statues if they're decorated in honor of Caesar .
Can we do that ?
I'll walk around and force the commoners off the streets .
You do the same , wherever the crowds are thick .
If we take away Caesar's support , he'll have to come back down to earth ; otherwise , he'll fly too high and keep the rest of us in a state of fear and obedience .
I'm not feeling well , that's all .
You're smart , though , and if you were sick , you'd take what you needed to get better .
I'm doing so .
Good Portia , go to bed .
Are you sick ?
And is it healthy to walk uncovered and breathe in the dampness of the morning ?
You're sick , yet you sneak out of your warm bed and let the humid and disease-infested air make you sicker ?
Don't kneel , noble Portia .
You're my true and honorable wife , as dear to me as the blood that runs through my sad heart .
If that were true , then I'd know your secret .
I admit I'm only a woman , but nevertheless I'm the woman Lord Brutus took for his wife .
I admit I'm only a woman , but I'm still a woman from a noble family , I'm Cato's daughter .
Do you really think I'm no stronger than the rest of my sex , with such a father and such a husband ?
Tell me your secrets .
I won't betray them .
I've proved my trustworthiness by giving myself a voluntary wound here in my thigh .
If I can bear that pain , then I can bear my husband's secrets .
Oh , gods , make me worthy of this noble wife !
Listen !
Someone knocks .
Leave me quickly .
Lucius , who's that knocking ?
Here's a sick man who wants to speak with you .
How I wish you felt better !
I'm not sick if you've prepared some honorable exploit for me .
Indeed , I would have such an exploit for you , Ligarius , if you were healthy enough to hear it .
A deed that will make sick men healthy .
But aren't there some healthy men whom we have to make sick ?
That too .
My dear Caius , I'll explain the task at hand to you as we walk toward the man we must do it to .
Follow me , then .
Neither the sky nor the earth have been quiet tonight .
Calphurnia cried out three times in her sleep , "Help , someone !
They're murdering Caesar ! " Who's there ?
My lord ?
Go tell the priests to perform a sacrifice immediately , and bring me their interpretation of the results .
I will , my lord .
What are you doing , Caesar ?
Are you planning to go out ?
You're not leaving the house today .
I will go out .
The things that threaten me have only seen my back .
When they see the face of Caesar , they will vanish .
Caesar , I never believed in omens , but now they frighten me .
A servant told me the night-watchmen saw horrid sights too , but different ones from what we heard and saw .
A lioness gave birth in the streets , and graves cracked open and thrust out their dead .
Fierce , fiery warriors fought in the clouds in the usual formations of war , ranks and squadrons , until the clouds drizzled blood onto the Capitol .
Oh , Caesar !
These things are beyond anything we've seen before , and I'm afraid .
How can we avoid what the gods want to happen ?
But I will go out , for these bad omens apply to the world in general as much as they do to me .
When beggars die there are no comets in the sky .
The heavens only announce the deaths of princes .
Cowards die many times before their deaths .
The brave experience death only once .
Of all the strange things I've ever heard , it seems most strange to me that men fear death , given that death , which can't be avoided , will come whenever it wants .
What do the priests say ?
They don't want you to go out today .
They pulled out the guts of the sacrificed animal and couldn't find its heart .
The gods do this to test my bravery .
They're saying I'd be an animal without a heart if I stayed home today out of fear .
So , I won't .
We're two lions born on the same day in the same litter , and I'm the older and more terrible .
I will go out .
Alas , my lord , your confidence is getting the better of your wisdom .
Don't go out today .
Say that it's my fear that keeps you inside and not your own .
We'll send Mark Antony to the senate house , and he'll say that you're sick today .
Mark Antony will say I'm not well , and to please you I'll stay at home .
Here's Decius Brutus .
He'll tell them so .
Hail , Caesar !
Good morning , worthy Caesar .
I've come to take you to the senate house .
And you've come at a good time , so you can convey my greetings to the senators and tell them I won't come today .
Would I send a lie ?
Have I accomplished so much in battle , but now I'm afraid to tell some old men the truth ?
Decius , go tell them that Caesar won't come .
Most mighty Caesar , give me some reason , so I won't be laughed at when I tell them so .
The reason is that it's what I want .
I'm not coming .
That's enough for the senate .
But for your private satisfaction , because I love you , I'll tell you .
Calphurnia , my wife , is keeping me at home .
She takes these signs for warnings and predictions of terrible evils to come , and , on her knee , she begged me to stay home today .
This dream has been interpreted all wrong .
It was a good and lucky vision .
Your statue spouting blood through many holes , in which many smiling Romans bathed , means that you'll provide great Rome with sustaining blood , and that great men will strive to get some token of approval from your holy blood .
This is what Calphurnia's dream means .
You've offered an excellent interpretation .
I will have when you hear the rest of what I have to say .
The senate has decided to give mighty Caesar a crown today .
If you send them word that you won't come , they might change their minds .
How foolish your fears seem now , Calphurnia !
I'm ashamed that I yielded to them .
Give me my robe , because I'm going .
And look , here's Publius , come to fetch me .
Good morning , Caesar .
Welcome , Publius .
Caius Ligarius , I was never your enemy so much as the sickness that's made you so thin .
What time is it ?
Caesar , the clock has struck eight .
I thank you all for your trouble and courtesy .
And to you , most noble Caesar .
I'm to blame for making you wait for me .
Trebonius !
Remember to see me today .
Stay near me so I'll remember .
Caesar , I will .
Good friends , go in and have some wine with me .
And we'll leave together , like friends .
Calphurnia !
Quiet !
Caesar's talking .
Calphurnia !
I'm here , my lord .
Yes , Caesar ?
I'll remember .
When Caesar says "do this , " it is done .
Continue , then , and don't forget to perform all of the rituals .
Caesar !
Caesar , beware of Brutus .
Watch Cassius .
Don't go near Casca .
Keep an eye on Cinna .
Don't trust Trebonius .
Pay attention to Metellus Cimber .
Decius Brutus doesn't love you .
You've wronged Caius Ligarius .
These men all have one intention , and it's directed against Caesar .
If you aren't immortal , watch those around you .
A sense of security opens the door to conspiracy .
I pray that the mighty gods defend you !
Your friend , Artemidorus." I'll stand here until Caesar passes by , and I'll give him this as though it's a petition .
If you read this , Caesar , you might live .
If not , the Fates are on the side of the traitors .
Boy , I beg you to run to the senate house .
Don't stay to answer me , get going .
I want you there and back again before I can even tell you what you should do there .
Madam , what should I do ?
Run to the Capitol and nothing else ?
And then return to you and nothing else ?
Yes , return and tell me if your master looks well , because he was sick when he left .
And pay attention to what Caesar does and which men are close to him .
Listen , boy !
What's that noise ?
I don't hear anything , madam .
I beg you , listen well .
Truly , madam , I don't hear anything .
Come here , you .
Where are you coming from ?
My own house , good lady .
What time is it ?
Around nine o'clock , madam .
Has Caesar gone to the Capital yet ?
Madam , not yet .
I'm going to stand so I can see him pass on the way to the Capitol .
You have some plea for Caesar , don't you ?
Yes , I do , lady .
If it pleases Caesar to be so good to himself as to hear me , I'll try to get him to do what's good for him .
Why , do you know of any harm intended toward him ?
Nothing that I know for sure , but a lot that I'm afraid might happen .
Good morning to you .
The street is narrow here .
The crowd that follows Caesar at his heels , senators , justices , common petitioners , will suffocate a feeble man almost to death .
I'll move to a more open place and there speak to great Caesar as he walks past .
I must go in .
Yes , Caesar , but it's not gone yet .
Oh , Caesar , read mine first , for my petition affects you more directly .
Read it , great Caesar .
Whatever pertains to myself I will deal with last .
Don't delay , Caesar .
Read it instantly .
What , is the man insane ?
You have weapons ?
What's going on here ?
Stop it , I order you .
The next person to strike again dies .
What's going on here ?
These are the messengers from my sister and the king .
What are you fighting about ?
Tell me .
I'm out of breath , sir .
A tailor made you .
That's an odd thing to say .
How can a tailor make a person ?
Definitely a tailor , sir .
A sculptor or a painter couldn't have screwed him up as bad as that , even as an apprentice .
But tell me what you're fighting about .
Calm down .
Don't you have any manners , you savage ?
Yes , sir , but not when I'm enraged .
Why are you enraged ?
Are you laughing at what I say , as if I were a fool ?
Are you insane , old man ?
Why are you calling him a jerk ?
What did he do to you ?
I don't like his face .
But maybe you don't like mine , or his , or hers either .
This is a guy who's been praised for his honest bluntness , and who now insolently pretends to be plainspoken and twists the natural meanings of words .
No flattery for him , no sir !
He's honest , he's got to speak the truth .
If people take what he says , fine .
If not , he's got truth on his side !
Dearest , kindest , most honorable sir , may I say , with your esteemed approval , which is lit up by the illuminating radiance of the sun-god Phoebus , that , What do you mean by that ?
I tried to stop speaking plainly , since you dislike plain speech so much .
Sir , I know I'm not a flatterer .
I never offended him at all .
These cowards manage to make fools of brave men .
Don't put me in the stocks .
I serve the king , who sent me here .
If you put me in the stocks you'll insult him both as a king and as a man .
Bring out the stocks !
I swear on my life and honor , he'll sit here in the stocks until noon .
Only until noon , my lord ?
No , the whole day , and all night too .
Ma'am , you wouldn't treat me like this if I were your father's dog .
But since you're his scoundrel servant , I will .
This guy is exactly the kind of person your sister warned us about. , Come on , bring in the stocks , now !
I beg you not to do this , my lord .
He's done wrong , and his master the king will punish him for it .
The king will be offended to find out that his messenger is so badly treated .
I'll take responsibility for that .
My sister would be much more offended to have her trusted messenger abused and assaulted just for carrying out her orders. , Put his legs in the stocks .
I'm sorry , my friend .
I'll try talking to him again .
Please don't , sir .
Even good men have bad luck .
Have a good morning .
It's wrong for the duke to do this .
The king will be angry with him .
honor you .
Hopefully when I get married , I'll give my husband half my love and half my sense of duty .
I'm sure I'll never get married in the way my sisters say they're married , loving their father only .
But do you mean what you're saying ?
Yes , my lord .
So young and so cruel ?
So young , my lord , and honest .
Then that's the way it'll be .
The truth will be all the inheritance you get .
Foreign savages who eat their own children for dinner will be as close to my heart as you , ex-daughter of mine .
But sir , Be quiet , Kent .
I heard myself declared an outlaw and escaped capture by hiding in the trunk of a hollow tree .
Every town and port is crawling with henchmen on the lookout , waiting to capture me .
I'll smear my face with filth , put on a loincloth , make my hair matted and tangled , and face the bad weather wearing almost nothing .
Well , at least that's something .
As Edgar , I'm nothing at all .
It's strange that Regan and her husband left their house without sending back my messenger .
According to what I heard , they had no travel plans as of last night .
What's this ?
Are you sitting around in this humiliation to amuse yourself ?
No , my lord .
Ha , ha !
That's a nasty garter belt .
You tie up horses by their heads , dogs and bears by their necks , monkeys by their waists , and humans by their legs .
Your daughter and son-in-law .
No .
Yes .
No , no , they wouldn't .
Yes , they have .
By the god Jupiter above , I swear "No." By Jupiter's wife Juno , I swear "Yes." They wouldn't dare .
They couldn't , they wouldn't .
It's worse than murder to humiliate a king's messenger like this .
My lord , when I arrived at their home I gave them your letter .
He woke up the whole house with his loud and cowardly screams .
That's why your daughter and son-in-law are punishing me shamefully .
Fathers who wear rags Make their children neglect them .
But fathers who are rich Make their children kind .
Lady Luck is a fickle whore And never gives the poor a break .
But despite all this , your daughters will give you a lot of money , or do I mean pain ? , in the coming year .
I feel my stomach squeezing up against my heart .
Inside , sir , with the earl .
Don't follow me .
Stay here .
You didn't do anything else to earn this punishment ?
Nothing .
Tell me , why did the king arrive with such a small entourage ?
If they'd put you in the stocks for asking that question , you would've deserved it .
Why , Fool ?
You need to learn what ants know well about winter , there's no point in slaving away if there's no hope for profit .
Everyone can see that , and even blind men can smell the stench of his misery now .
When you see a huge wheel rolling down a hill , you shouldn't try to hold on to it or it'll break your neck .
But if you see a wheel going uphill , latch on for the ride .
And when a wise man gives you better advice than I just did , give me my advice back again .
I only want idiots following my advice , the advice of a fool .
The gentleman who serves you only for profit And is only superficially loyal to you Will take off when it starts to rain And leave you alone in the storm .
But I'll linger .
The fool will stay .
And let the wise man run away .
Where did you learn that song , Fool ?
Not in the stocks , fool .
How can they refuse to speak with me ?
They're playing with me .
These are tricks .
This is rebellion .
My dear lord , you know how passionately stubborn the duke is .
Damn it all to hell !
Passionately" ?
What "passion" ?
Gloucester , Gloucester , I want to speak with the Duke of Cornwall and his wife .
My lord , I informed them as much .
Informed them" ?
Do you understand what I'm saying , man ?
Yes , my lord .
The king wants to speak with Cornwall .
Did you inform them of that ?
This is unbelievable !
Passionate" ?
The "passionate" duke ?
Tell the hot-headed duke that I, But no , not yet .
Maybe he's not feeling well .
I just want everything to be all right between you .
Oh , my heart , my heart is rising into my throat !
Stay down , heart .
That's right , uncle , talk to your heart , like the Good morning to you both .
Hail to your majesty .
I'm glad to see your highness .
I believe you are , Regan .
You know why I think so ?
My dear Regan , your sister's not worth anything .
Oh , Regan , she's torn me apart with unkindness , like a vulture , right here .
Calm down , sir , please .
How do you mean ?
I can't believe my sister would neglect her obligations in any way .
If she restrained your rowdy knights , she had such a good reason that you can't blame her for it .
I curse her .
Sir , you're old .
Your life is stretched to its limit .
You should let others take care of you and submit to people who know better than you do what's good for you .
Please go back to Goneril's house .
Admit you were wrong .
Apologize ?
No more , please .
These are ugly antics .
Go back to my sister's .
Shush , sir , please !
I hope lightning strikes her in the eyes !
I hope poisonous swampy fog covers her face and ruins her complexion !
Oh , dear gods !
That's how you'll talk about me when you're in this mood .
Her eyes are vicious , but yours are comforting .
You haven't forgotten the half of a kingdom I gave you .
Sir , let's get to the point .
Get out of my sight ! , I guess if she doesn't love her father , then I'll only have peace when I'm dead. , Call the King of France .
Call the Duke of Burgundy .
If she wants to be proud , or "honest , " as she calls it , she can just marry her own pride .
King Lear , I've always honored you as king , loved you as my father , obeyed you as my master , and thanked you in my prayers , I'm furious and ready to snap .
Let your anger fall on me then , even if its sharpness pierces my heart .
Kent can speak rudely when Lear goes mad .
What are you doing , old man ?
When powerful kings cave in to flatterers , do you think loyal men will be afraid to speak out against it ?
When a majestic king starts acting silly , then it's my duty to be blunt .
What's that trumpet ?
I know it .
She'll be here soon , just like her letter said .
This is a lowlife who basks in the reflection of the fading glory of the woman he works for. , Get out of my sight , scoundrel !
What do you mean , your highness ?
Who put my servant in the stocks ?
Regan , I hope you didn't know anything about that. , Ah , who's this ?
Why shouldn't she take my hand , father ?
How exactly have I offended you ?
I sent him there , sir , but his crimes deserved a worse punishment .
You !
You did it ?
Please , father , since you're weak , act like it .
Get rid of half your knights and go back to spend the rest of your month with my sister .
Right now I'm away from home and I can't provide you with proper care .
Go back with her ?
Go back with her ?
I might as well go before the King of France , who took my youngest daughter without a dowry , kneel before his throne , and beg him to give me a tiny pension to stay alive .
Go back with her ?
I'd rather be a slave or a packhorse for this hateful stablehand here .
As you wish , sir .
I beg you , daughter , don't make me crazy .
I won't bother you .
We'll never see each other again .
But you're still my child , my flesh and blood , or rather you're a disease in my flesh , a disease I still have to call my own .
You're a pustule , a sore , a tumor digesting my bloodline .
But I'll stop rebuking you .
I won't beg the gods to punish you , or caution you to fear their judgment .
Become a better
person when you're ready , if you're inclined .
I'll wait patiently .
Meanwhile I'll stay with Regan with my hundred knights .
It's not quite that simple .
I wasn't expecting you , and I'm not ready to receive you .
Please hear what Goneril is saying .
We're trying to be reasonable while you're so upset , and we understand that you're old , and, But Goneril knows what she's doing .
Yes , I do .
How could so many people , under two masters , get along under one roof ?
It would be hard , almost impossible .
Why couldn't you be attended by my servants , or by Regan's ?
Yes , why not , my lord ?
Then if they're negligent , we could control them .
Now that I think about the danger of these knights , if you come to stay with me , please bring no more than twenty-five of them with you .
I won't lodge any more than that under my roof .
I gave you everything , And it was about time too .
I made you de facto rulers of my kingdom on condition that I could keep a hundred knights of my own .
Why should I now have to make do with only twenty-five ?
Regan , is that what you said ?
Yes , I'll say it again , my lord .
No more than twenty-five .
Not being the worst daughter deserves some praise , I guess .
Hear me out , my lord .
Why do you need twenty-five knights , or ten , or even five , when you're staying in a house with a staff of double that at your service ?
Why do you need even one ?
Oh , don't ask me why I "need" them !
You're a well-dressed lady .
If you dressed only to stay warm , you wouldn't need these gorgeous clothes you're wearing , which don't keep you warm at all .
Oh , gods , give me patience !
You see me here , gods , a grieving old man , as wretched in his grief as he is in his old age .
If you're the ones setting my daughters against me , don't let me be foolish enough to take it lying down .
man's cheeks .
No , you monstrous hags , I'll get revenge on you both that will make the whole world, I will do such things , I don't know what I'll do exactly , but it'll be devastating .
You expect me to cry ?
Well , I won't .
I have a good reason to cry , but my heart will splinter into a hundred thousand pieces before I let myself cry. , Oh , Fool , I'll go mad !
Let's go inside .
There's going to be a storm .
This is a small house .
There's no room for the old man and his followers .
It's his fault that he's all worked up like this .
He has to pay the price for his foolish actions .
That's what I intend to do too .
Where is Gloucester ?
He followed the old man .
Here he comes back .
Where's he going ?
He has called for his horse , but I don't know where he's headed .
It's best just to let him go .
He won't listen to anyone's advice .
There's hardly a bush for miles around .
Oh , sir , impetuous people learn their lessons from the consequences of their foolish actions .
Lock the doors .
His attendants are desperate , violent men .
I'm afraid of what they might encourage him to do , considering the state he's in .
Lock the doors , my lord .
It's a wild night .
Regan gives good advice .
Come in out of the storm .
Who's there , aside from this foul weather ?
Someone whose mood is as foul as the weather , very troubled .
I know you .
Where's the king ?
Struggling with the wind and rain .
He's shouting at the wind to blow the earth into the sea , or make the sea flood the earth , he wants to see the world return to primal chaos .
He keeps tearing out his white hair , which the blindly raging winds catch up and blow away into nothingness .
Small but brave in his surroundings , he's trying to stand up against the wind and rain blowing back and forth .
He's running bareheaded , calling for the end of the world , out there on a night like this , when even savage animals ravenous with hunger crawl under cover and hide .
But who's with him ?
Nobody but the fool , who's trying to soothe the wounds in the king's heart with jokes .
Sir , I know you , and I trust you enough to share something very important with you .
Some French agents are already at work in our main ports and are on the verge of declaring open war .
Now this is where you come in .
I'm a nobleman , and I know what I'm doing in assigning this job to you .
Let's discuss it some more .
Let me shake your hand .
Do you have anything else to tell me ?
Rage on , blow !
Let tornadoes spew water until the steeples of our churches and the weathervanes are all drowned .
Let quick sulfurous lightning , strong enough to split enormous trees , singe the white hair on my head .
Let thunder flatten the spherical world , crack open all the molds from which nature forms human beings , and spill all the seeds from which ungrateful humans grow !
Oh , uncle , it's better to smile and flatter indoors where it's dry than get soaked out here .
Please , uncle , let's go in and ask your daughters to forgive you .
This storm has no pity for either wise men or fools .
Let thunder rumble !
Let lightning spit fire !
Let the rain spray !
The rain , the wind , the thunder and lightning are not my daughters .
Nature , I don't accuse your weather of unkindness .
So go ahead and have your terrifying fun .
Here I am , your slave , a poor , sick , weak , hated old man .
Anyone who has a house to cover his head has a good head on his shoulders .
On my life I swear to you that your youngest daughter doesn't love you least .
Kent , if you want to stay alive , stop talking .
Get out of my sight !
Learn to see better , Lear , and let me stay here where you can look to me for good advice .
Now , I swear by Apollo, By Apollo , King , you're taking the names of the gods in vain .
Oh , you lowlife !
Scum !
Please stop , sir .
Listen to me , you traitor .
For there never was a pretty woman who didn't like to preen in the mirror .
No , I'll be patient .
I won't say a word .
Who's there ?
A wise man and a fool .
Let the gods who stirred up this dreadful storm bring their enemies to light .
It will give you some protection from this storm .
They are harder than the stones the house is made of .
I'm starting to lose my mind .
That's true , my good boy. , Come on , take us to that hut .
I'll recite a prophecy before I go .
And whoever lives to see that day Will walk with his feet .
This is the prophecy that the wizard
Oh , oh , Edmund , I don't like this monstrous business .
When asked the Duke and Duchess of Cornwall if I could take pity on the king and shelter him from the storm , they took my house away from me and ordered me never to talk about him , lobby for him , or support him in any way .
That's uncivilized and unnatural !
Oh , be quiet .
There's a feud between the two dukes .
It's dangerous to talk about it .
I've locked it up in my room .
The humiliation that the king is suffering now will be revenged thoroughly .
Armed forces have already landed .
We have to take the king's side .
I'll look for him and secretly help him .
You go and talk to the duke so he won't notice I'm helping the king .
If he asks to see me , tell him I'm sick and went to bed .
Even if I have to die , as they threaten , I have to help the king .
Strange things are about to happen , Edmund .
Please be careful .
And I'll tell him about the letter too .
The young generation rises while the old one falls .
Here's the hut , my lord .
Please go inside .
The night's too rough for humans to bear .
Leave me for a bit .
My lord , here is the entrance .
Will you break my heart ?
I'd rather break my own heart .
Now please go in .
You think it's a big deal that this fierce storm is soaking me to the skin .
It's a big deal to you .
But whenever you feel a larger pain , the smaller one disappears .
You would run away from a bear , but if the only way to run was into the stormy ocean , you'd turn around and confront the bear .
When your mind is at peace , your body is sensitive to the elements .
But this storm in my mind keeps me from feeling anything except what's tormenting me , how ungrateful my children are !
Isn't their ingratitude like the mouth biting the hand that feeds it ?
But I'll punish them thoroughly .
No , I won't cry any more .
Imagine them locking me out on a night like this !
But let it rain ; I'll survive .
On a night like this !
Oh , Regan , Goneril , your kind old father whose generous heart gave you everything , Oh , if I think about that I'll go mad .
I want to avoid that .
No more of these thoughts .
My lord , please go inside here .
Go inside yourself .
Make yourself comfortable .
This storm protects me from thoughts that would hurt me more .
But I'll go in .
Go out and feel what the impoverished feel .
Don't come in here , uncle !
There's a spirit in here !
Help me , help me !
Give me your hand .
Who's there ?
A ghost , a ghost !
He says his name's Poor Tom .
Who are you , moaning in the hut like that ?
Come out .
Go away !
The devil's after me !
The cold wind blows through the hawthorn trees .
Ha !
Get into your cold beds and warm yourselves up .
Did you give everything to your two daughters and end up like this ?
Bless your five senses !
Tom's chilly .
Oh do-de , do-de , do-de .
God protect you from tornadoes , evil stars , and diseases !
Take pity on Poor Tom , who is persecuted by the devil .
There ! , And over there ! , And over there !
Have his daughters made him crazy like this ? , Couldn't you have kept something for yourself ?
Did you have to give them everything ?
If he hadn't , we'd all be embarrassed to look at him .
Then may your daughters be cursed with all the horrible fates that await sinners !
He doesn't have any daughters , sir .
Like hell !
Nothing but cruel daughters could have degraded him like this .
Is it fashionable now for neglected fathers to get so little pity ?
I'm the one who fathered those bloodsucking daughters .
This stormy night will turn us all into fools and madmen .
Beware of the devil .
Obey your parents , keep your word , don't swear , don't sleep with another man's wife , and don't covet flashy clothes .
Tom's chilly .
What were you before this ?
I loved wine and gambling , and had more women than a Turkish sultan keeps in his harem .
The cold wind's still blowing through the hawthorn tree .
Look at him .
The human being unburdened by the trappings of civilization is no more than a poor , naked , two-legged animal like you .
Let me unbutton this .
Please calm down , uncle .
This is a nasty night to go swimming .
On a night like this a campfire in an empty field would be like the heart of a dirty old man , a tiny spark in a cold body .
Look , here comes a walking fire .
This is the devil Flibbertigibbet .
He gets up at nightfall and wanders around till dawn .
And go away , witch , go away .
How are you , your highness ?
Who are you ?
What do you want ?
Who are you ?
What are your names ?
Calm down , Smulkin , you fiend !
He's called Modo and Mahu .
Poor Tom's chilly .
Come back to my house with me .
I couldn't bear to obey all of your daughters ' harsh orders .
They commanded me to lock my doors and leave you out in this merciless storm , but I've come out here to find you and take you where there's warmth and food .
First let me talk with this philosopher here. ,
Now get out of here !
I swear by Jupiter I'll never revoke this punishment .
Farewell , King .
Here are the rulers of France and Burgundy , my lord .
My lord the ruler of Burgundy , I'll speak to you first .
You've been competing with this king for my daughter .
Let me ask you something in private .
Can you blame him ?
His daughters want to kill him .
Ah , good old Kent said this would happen , that poor , banished man .
You say the king is losing his mind .
Let me tell you , my friend , I'm almost insane myself .
I had a son , whom I've legally disowned .
He tried to kill me recently , very recently .
I loved him , as much as any father ever loved his son .
What a storm !
Excuse me , sir. , Tom's chilly .
Stay warm .
Come on , let's all go inside .
This way , my lord .
Come on , my dear Greek philosopher .
I'll get my revenge before I leave this house .
I'm afraid to think how I'll be criticized for letting my natural affection for my father give way to my loyalty to you .
Now I realize your brother tried to kill your father not just because your brother is an evil man , but because your father deserved it by being wicked himself .
How unlucky am I , having to apologize for doing the right thing !
Come with me to see the duchess .
If this letter's right , you've got a lot to deal with .
Right or not , it's made you the Earl of Gloucester .
I put my trust in you .
It's better here than outside .
Be happy about it .
I'll do what I can to make you even more comfortable .
I won't be gone long .
He can't bear his grief and so he's losing his mind .
May God reward you for your kindness !
He's a king , a king !
No , he's an ordinary guy who 's got a gentleman for a son , since someone would have to be crazy to let his son become a gentleman before he's achieved that distinction himself .
I see Regan and Goneril in hell , A thousand hissing devils with sizzling red pitchforks come up to them !
The nasty devil's biting my butt .
I'll do it .
The devil sings like a nightingale to haunt Poor Tom .
The demon Hoppedance is in Tom's belly , crying for some fish to eat .
Stop whining , devil .
I've got no food to give you .
Let's have the evidence .
Let's give a fair verdict .
There she is .
Come here , ma'am .
Is your name Goneril ?
She can't deny it .
And here's Regan , whose grotesque face betrays her twisted heart .
Stop her !
Fire !
You corrupt judge , why did you let her escape ?
Bless your heart .
Look at the three little dogs , Tray , Blanch , and Sweetheart , all barking at me .
Tom will chase them off. , Go away , you mongrels !
Whether you bite to kill , Mastiff , greyhound , or ugly mutt ,
Hound or spaniel , bitch or dog , Whether your tail is short or curly , Tom will make you cry and wail .
With one little toss of his head , He can scare you off for good .
Whether your mouth is black or white , Do-dee , dee-dee da .
Stop !
Run off , go visit fairs and festivals !
Poor Tom , your cup is empty .
Is there any natural cause for hardening of the heart ?
Please lie down and rest a while , my lord .
Be quiet , be quiet .
Draw the curtains , just like that .
We'll have supper in the morning .
That's right .
And I'll go to bed at noon .
He's here , sir , but please don't bother him .
He's out of his right mind .
Please get him , my friend , I beg you .
Put
Carry your master out .
Come on , come on .
When we see that our betters have the same problems we do , we can almost forget our own misery .
The person who suffers alone suffers the most .
Companions in sorrow alleviate our grief .
Let's go , Tom .
Whatever else happens tonight , I hope the king escapes safely !
Lurk out of sight .
Hang him immediately .
Gouge out his eyes !
Leave him to my wrath. , Edmund , go with my sister-in-law .
You shouldn't have to see the punishment we inflict on your father .
Tell the Duke of Albany to prepare for war immediately .
We will do the same .
We'll keep the lines of communication open between us .
Hello .
Where's the king ?
Lord Gloucester has helped him leave .
Thirty-five or thirty-six of his knights met him at the gate , and together with some others they've set off for Dover , where they claim to have powerful friends .
Prepare the horses for your lady .
Goodbye , my sweet lord. , Goodbye , my sister .
Goodbye , Edmund .
Go find the traitor Gloucester .
Tie him up like a thief and bring him here to me .
That's him .
Tie up his withered old arms .
What are you doing ?
My friends , remember that you're my guests here .
Don't play any nasty tricks on me .
Tie him up , I tell you .
Your highness , I want nothing more than what you've already offered .
I know you'll offer nothing less than that .
There she is , over there .
I don't know what to say .
So do you take her or leave her ?
Then leave her , sir .
Tie him up harder. , You filthy traitor !
I'm not a traitor , unfair lady .
Tie him to this chair. , You'll see , criminal , By the gods , it's disgraceful for you to pull my beard .
As old and white-haired as you are , and you're such a traitor ?
Wicked woman , these white hairs you're pulling off my chin will come to life and accuse you of wrong-doing .
You are my guests .
This is no way to treat a host who has welcomed you into his house .
What do you think you're doing ?
Tell us about the letters that you got from France .
Get to the point , since we already know the truth .
And what's your connection with the traitors who landed in our kingdom recently ?
The ones you've sent our lunatic king to .
Tell us .
It came from a neutral party , not from someone opposed to you .
How clever of you .
Clever lies .
Where have you sent the king ?
To Dover .
Why Dover ?
Weren't you ordered , on penalty of , Why Dover ? , Let him answer that question first .
I'm backed into a corner with nowhere to run .
Why Dover ?
Because I didn't want to watch while you gouged out his poor old eyes with your cruel fingernails , or while your vicious sister sank her fangs into his sacred flesh .
You left him out in the storm in the black night , bareheaded , a storm so terrible that if it had happened at sea , the waters would have risen up and extinguished the fire burning in the stars .
And the poor old man just wept , mixing his tears with the rain .
If wolves had been howling outside your gate at the heart of that storm , you would've told your doorman to let them in , despite all the cruelties you inflict on the world .
But soon I'll see the gods punish you for your lack of respect to your father .
You won't be seeing anything. , Hold his chair still , men. , I'm going to put my foot on his eyes .
Oh , help me , anyone who wants to live long !
Oh , so cruel !
Oh dear gods !
Now he's a little crooked .
I've served you since childhood , but I've never done you a better service than telling you to stop .
What's this , you dog ?
I am willing to fight you if I must .
What do you mean by all this ?
Come on then .
I am dying ! , My lord , you still have one eye left to see Cornwall punished .
Oh !
Where's your sparkle now ?
Where's my son Edmund ?
Wrong , evil traitor .
You're appealing to a son who hates you .
He's too good to have any compassion for you .
What a fool I've been !
This means I've mistreated Edgar .
He can sniff his way to Dover .
I'm wounded .
Follow me , madam. , Throw the blind traitor outside .
And throw this dead peasant into the manure pit. , Regan , I'm bleeding .
It's a bad time for such an injury .
Give me your arm .
If our criminal master gets off free , I won't care what happens to me anymore .
If she lives a long and happy life , then all women may as well turn into monsters .
Let's follow the old earl , and get that crazy Tom to take him wherever he wants to go .
As a wandering lunatic , he can do whatever he wants .
Go ahead .
I'll get some cloth and egg whites to bandage his bleeding face .
Heaven help him !
At the bottom , any change is for the better .
So I welcome this wind freely .
But who is this ?
My father , led by a poor peasant ?
Oh , life is full of surprises !
We age and die because they wear us out .
I've rented land from you and your father for eighty years .
Away , get out of here .
Leave me , my friend .
But you can't see where you're going , sir .
I don't have anywhere to go , so I don't need to see .
When I could see , I didn't always see clearly .
It's often the case that having something makes us spoiled , while not having it turns out to be advantageous .
If I live long enough to touch you again , that would be as good as having my eyesight back .
Who's that ?
Who's there ?
Is it a beggar ?
I was reminded of my son , even though I despised my son at that time .
Now I know better .
Is that the naked guy ?
Yes , my lord .
But sir , he's crazy .
It's the tragedy of our times that lunatics must lead the blind .
Do as I asked you .
Or rather , do what you feel like doing .
Hey , naked guy , Poor Tom's chilly .
Come here , man .
Do you know the way to Dover ?
Poor Tom has been scared out of his mind .
Bless you , master .
Yes , sir .
There's a cliff there that leans precariously over the deep sea .
Take me to the edge of it , and I'll reward all your troubles with something valuable .
Once I'm there , I won't need a guide anymore .
Give me your arm .
Poor Tom will take you there .
Welcome , my lord .
I'm surprised my bland husband didn't meet me on the way here .
Where's your master ?
But it'd take a miracle to make me believe she could do anything that horrible .
Enough .
It would've been better for you not to have been born at all than to displease me as you did .
You mean this is the whole problem , that she is shy and hasn't said everything she means to say and do ? , My lord of Burgundy , what do you have to say to this lady ?
Love's not love when it gets mixed up with irrelevant outside matters .
Will you marry her ?
She herself is as valuable as any dowry could ever be .
I'm at your service until death .
My dear Gloucester !
What a man ! , especially compared to my husband .
Edmund , you deserve me to be your woman .
There's a fool sharing my bed now .
Ma'am , my master's coming .
So you finally find me worthy of your attentions .
Goneril , you aren't worth the dust the wind blows in your face .
I don't trust you .
You can't trust anyone who abuses her own father , her flesh and blood .
She will wither and come to a bad end .
Oh , shut up .
Your words are idiotic .
Bad people can't appreciate wisdom or goodness .
They only like things as bad as themselves .
What have you two sisters done ?
You're tigers , not daughters .
Could my good brother-in-law , a man to whom the
Coward !
Shame on you , warped hag !
Your true demonic features are distorting your body .
If I let myself do what I yearn to , I'd rip the flesh off your bones .
But I won't attack a woman , even if she is a demon .
I sneeze on your manhood .
What news do you bring ?
Gloucester's eyes ?
There's justice in heaven after all !
That these crimes are punished so quickly is proof .
But oh , poor Glou-cester !
Did he lose his other eye ?
He lost both , my lord. , Ma'am , this letter is from your sister , and needs an immediate answer .
He was on his way here with your wife .
But he isn't here now .
No , my lord .
Yes , my lord .
He was the one who denounced his father .
What else you do know ?
Do you know why the King of France suddenly went back home ?
It was urgent and important enough to require his personal presence .
Whom did he leave in charge here ?
The marshal of France , Monsieur la Far .
Was Queen Cordelia aggrieved by the letters you delivered ?
Yes , sir .
She seemed to be trying to control her emotions , which were overwhelming her .
So she was moved by it ?
If everyone looked so lovely in their sorrow , then sorrow would be highly prized .
She didn't ask anything ?
Actually , once or twice she sighed and said , "father , " as if the word were pressing on her chest .
Once she exclaimed , "Sisters , sisters , shame on you !
Kent , father , sisters !
What , out in a storm in the middle of the night ?
I can't believe it." The tears fell from her eyes like holy water .
Then she ran away to grieve alone .
Have you not spoken to her since then ?
No .
Did this happen before the King of France returned home ?
No , afterward .
Why , good sir ?
He's too overwhelmed with shame .
He remembers how unkind he was to her , how he disowned her and sent her abroad , how he gave her rightful inheritance to her two dog-hearted sisters .
All those memories pain his mind so deeply that guilt and shame keep him away from Cordelia .
Oh , the poor man !
Have you heard about Albany's and Cornwall's troops ?
I have .
They're on the march .
Well , sir , I'll take you to Lear and have you stay with him a while .
I have important business that requires me to remain in disguise a while longer .
When I've revealed my true identity , you'll be glad you took the time to help me out .
Please come with me .
Sadly , it's the king that's missing .
They saw him just now as mad and deranged as the stormy sea , singing loudly , wearing a crown of nettles , thorns , hemlock , and all the other weeds that grow in our cornfields. , Send out a hundred soldiers to find him .
Search high and low , in every acre of the fields , and bring him here for me to see him .
There is a way , ma'am .
But there are many herbs that will help him rest and take his mind off his anguish for a while .
Then I'll water all those precious herbs with my tears to make them grow .
May they relieve a sick old man's suffering .
Go find those herbs for him , before his madness puts his life in danger .
I have news , ma'am .
The British forces are on their way here .
We already knew that .
Our forces are ready for them .
Oh , father , I'm taking care of your business .
That's why the King of France listened to my pleas and tears .
We're not invading England out of ambition or greed , but out of love , dear love ! , and my father's right to his kingdom .
I hope I see him and hear him again soon .
Have my brother-in-law's troops been mobilized ?
Yes , ma'am .
Is he there in person ?
Yes , making a big fuss .
Your sister's the better soldier of the two .
Lord Edmund didn't speak to your master at home ?
No , ma'am .
What could my sister's letter to him say ?
I don't know , ma'am .
He rushed away on serious business .
It was a huge mistake to let old Gloucester live after we blinded him .
Wherever he goes , he inspires compassion and people turn against us .
And also to find out the size of the enemy army .
I have to follow him and give him the letter .
Our troops are deployed tomorrow .
Stay with us tonight .
It's dangerous out there .
Peace to you , my lord of Burgundy .
Since you love money and power so much , I won't be your wife .
I'll take you and your wonderful virtues here and now , if it's okay that I'm picking up what others have thrown away .
No Duke of spineless Burgundy can take this treasure of a girl from me now. , Say goodbye to them , Cordelia , even though they've been unkind to you .
She's no longer my daughter , and I'll never see her face again .
Say goodbye to your sisters .
I can't , ma'am .
My lady ordered me to deliver her letter .
Why would she write to Edmund ?
It probably has something to do with, I don't know .
Ma'am , I'd rather , I know your lady Goneril doesn't love her husband .
I'm sure of that .
And when she was here recently she flirted with Edmund and gave him significant glances .
I know she trusts you and tells you everything .
Me , ma'am ?
I know what I'm talking about .
So I recommend you take note of what I'm about to say .
My husband is dead .
Edmund and I have talked , and it makes more sense for him to marry me than Goneril .
You can figure out the rest .
Goodbye .
When will we get to the top of that cliff ?
The ground feels flat to me .
No , it's dreadfully steep .
No , really , I don't .
Then your other senses must be getting worse because of the trauma of blindness .
It may be so .
It seems to me that your voice has changed , and that your speech is more elegant than it used to be .
You're mistaken about all that .
The only thing different about me is my clothes .
I think you're more articulate .
Come on , sir .
This is the place .
Stand still .
It's so scary to look down !
The crows flying down below look as small as ants .
Halfway down the cliff there's somebody clinging to the rock and gathering wild herbs , a risky business !
That big ship over there looks no bigger
Up here you can't even hear the waves crashing against the rocks .
Lead me to where you're standing .
Give me your hand .
You're now within a foot of the cliff's edge .
Let go of my hand .
Goodbye , good sir .
With all my heart .
Oh , you mighty gods !
Gone , sir .
Goodbye .
Go away and let me die .
You just fell the height of ten ship masts , straight down .
It's a miracle you're alive .
Say something again .
But did I fall or not ?
You fell from the terrifying top of this chalk cliff .
Look for yourself , see the top of the cliff way up there ?
The lark shrilly singing up there is too far away to be heard .
Just look .
It used to be the last ditch comfort of miserable people .
Give me your arm .
Get up .
How do you feel ?
Can you feel your legs ?
You're standing .
Only too well .
This is beyond weird .
What was that thing I saw moving away from you up on the cliff before you fell ?
That was a poor unlucky beggar .
From down here , I thought his eyes looked like full moons .
He had a thousand noses and twisted horns , like wave crests in a storm at sea .
It was some devil .
I understand now .
From now on I'll put up with my anguish until the anguish itself cries out , "Enough , enough ! " and disappears .
I thought that thing you're talking about was a man .
Cheer up and be at peace .
But who is that ?
I'm the king himself .
Life's better at
piece of cheese will get him. , I challenge you to a match .
Oh , that arrow was well shot .
Whoosh !
Sweet marjoram .
That's it !
I know that voice .
Ha !
Goneril with a white beard ?
I tell you , they are not honest men .
They told me I was everything .
I recognize something about that voice .
Isn't that the king ?
Yes , every inch a king .
I pardon that man .
What are you accused of ?
Adultery ?
I'll commute your death sentence .
To die for adultery ?
No .
Little birds do it , and dragonflies copulate right in front of me .
Let's have more sex in the world , since Gloucester's bastard son was kinder to him than my daughters , conceived in lawful wedlock , have been to me .
Get to it , be lustful , sleep around , I need soldiers for my army .
Women are sex machines below the waist , though they're chaste up above .
That's where hell is , and darkness , and fires and stench !
Give me an aphrodisiac , pharmacist .
There's money in it for you .
Oh , let me kiss his hand !
Let me wipe it off first .
I remember your eyes quite well .
Are you squinting at me ?
Read it .
How ?
With my eye sockets ?
Oh ho , is that what you're getting at ?
No eyes in your head til there's money in your wallet ?
What , are you crazy ?
You don't need eyes to see how the world works .
Look with your ears .
Look how the judge yells at a simple thief .
Have you seen a farmer's dog bark at a beggar ?
Yes , sir .
And you saw how the beggar ran from the mutt ?
That's authority !
You stupid cop , stop your violence !
Why are you whipping that whore ?
You should be whipping yourself , since you lust after her and yearn to do the same thing for which you're punishing her .
One criminal punishes another .
You can't blame anyone for it anyone , I say .
I'll vouch for that .
Believe me , my friend , since I have the power to stop the prosecutors .
Harder , harder .
Like that .
If you want to cry over my bad luck , I'll give you my eyes .
I know you .
Your name's Gloucester .
You have to be patient with me .
I came here crying .
The first time we see the world as newborns , we cry and scream .
I'll read you a sermon .
Listen to this .
Oh , how awful !
When we're born , we cry because we've arrived on the stage of life , like all the other fools .
That's a nice hat you've got there .
How ingenious to make horseshoes out of felt .
I'll test it out .
And when I've sneaked up on my sons-in-law , then I'll kill , kill , kill , kill , kill , kill !
What , I'm a prisoner ?
No rescue for me ?
Treat me well .
There's a ransom .
I need a doctor .
My brains are injured .
You can have anything you want .
Will no one back me up ?
Am I all alone ?
That would make anyone cry enough to water his garden with his tears .
Good sir ,
I'll die You're of royal blood , and we obey you .
Then there's still a chance .
Come and get it !
But you'll have to catch me !
Catch me if you can !
Sa , sa , sa , sa .
In a king , the sight is unbearable .
Hello , good sir .
How do you do , sir .
How can I help you ?
Have you heard any news of impending battle ?
Certainly .
Everyone who can hear has heard about it .
Could you tell me how near the enemy is ?
Very near , and approaching fast .
The main body of the army is expected here any hour now .
Thank you , sir .
That's all I wanted to know .
I know you for what you really are , but as your sister I'm reluctant to criticize you .
I leave him in your care , but oh , if only I were still in his favor I could arrange for better care for him .
Goodbye to you both .
Don't tell us what our duty is .
Time will tell what you've got up your sleeve .
Have a good life .
Come with me , my dear Cordelia .
Sister , I have a lot to say about things that concern us both .
I think that our father will leave here tonight .
Yes , I'm sure he will , to stay with you .
Next month he'll stay with us .
He's so flighty in his old age , as we keep noticing .
He has always loved Cordelia best , and his bad judgment in disowning her now is obvious .
The queen is here on special business , and her army has moved on .
Thank you , sir .
Gentle gods in heaven , please let me die .
Don't tempt me to suicide again .
Pray well , father .
And who are you , good sir ?
I'm a poor man who's been humbled by many misfortunes .
Thank you very much .
May heaven bless you .
What good luck !
That blind head of yours was created to make me rich .
You old traitor , repent all your sins .
I hope you're strong enough to do it .
Whoa , man , you dare to support someone who's been proclaimed a traitor ?
Get out of here , before his bad luck infects you too .
Let go of his arm .
Oh no , sir , I won't let him go , sir , not without a good reason .
Let go of him , peasant , or you die !
I'll knock your teeth out , sir .
To hell with your sword .
I know you well .
You're a hardworking villain who'd do anything his evil mistress wanted him to .
Is he dead ?
Let's look in his pockets .
The letters he spoke of may help me .
He's dead .
I'm just sorry I had to be the one to kill him .
Let's see here .
Come on , envelope , open up for me .
Reading their mail isn't as bad .
Don't forget the vows we made to each other .
The king is insane .
It'd be better to be delirious and unaware of anything .
Give me your hand .
I think I hear the drums far away .
Come , father , I'll leave you at a friend's house .
Oh , Kent , what could I ever do to become as good as you are ?
I won't live long enough , and all my efforts will fail me .
Just being thanked is more than enough for me , madam .
I hope all reports about me simply tell the truth , no more or less .
Change into better clothes .
Please take them off .
I have to ask you , as a favor , not to let on that you recognize me until the time is right .
All right , my lord. , How's the king doing ?
He's still sleeping , ma'am .
Would you mind if we woke up the king ?
He's slept a long time .
Is he in his royal garments ?
Yes , ma'am .
Stay close by when we wake him up , ma'am .
I'm sure he will stay under control .
All right .
Please come closer. , Make the music louder , please !
Kind and dear princess !
If you hadn't been their father , your white hair would have inspired in them only compassion .
And were you then happy to find shelter on a bed of hay along with swine and homeless bums ?
Oh , oh !
It's a wonder you didn't lose your life and your mind all at once. , He's waking up .
Talk to him .
You talk to him , ma'am .
That's most appropriate .
How are you , my royal lord ?
How is your majesty doing ?
You do me wrong by taking me out of the grave .
Even my tears burn me like molten lead .
Sir , do you know who I am ?
You're a spirit , I know .
Where did you die ?
Let him be for a bit .
Where have I been ?
Where am I ?
Is it daytime ?
I've been tricked .
I would die of pity to see someone else in my condition .
I don't know what to say .
I can't even be sure these are my hands .
Let's see .
I feel this pinprick .
I wish I knew what is happening .
Please don't make fun of me .
I'm a foolish , senile old man , eighty-something years old , not an hour more or less .
To put it plainly , I'm afraid I'm not quite sane .
I feel I should recognize you and that man
I can't recall where I slept last night .
Don't laugh at me , but I swear I think this lady is my child Cordelia .
And I am , I am .
Are your tears wet ?
Yes , indeed they are .
Please don't cry .
If you have poison for me , I'll drink it .
But you didn't , even though you had every reason .
I had no reason , no reason .
Am I in France ?
You're in your own kingdom , sir .
Don't deceive me .
You can relax , ma'am .
His insane period is over .
But it's dangerous to make him try to make sense of the time he lost .
Ask him to go in .
Don't trouble him further until his mind is more settled .
Would your highness like to take a walk ?
You'll have to bear with me .
Please forgive and forget .
I'm old and foolish .
Is it true , sir , that the Duke of Cornwall was killed as they say ?
Yes , it's true , sir .
Who is leading his men ?
They say Gloucester's bastard son is .
I hear that Edgar , Gloucester's exiled son , is with the Earl of Kent in Germany .
You can't trust all the rumors .
It's time to reassess the situation .
The British troops are coming near .
It will likely be a bloody fight .
Goodbye , sir .
I'm afraid that may be the case , madam .
Now , my sweet lord , you know how much I like you .
Tell me truthfully , do you love my sister ?
No .
I'm just worried that you've been cozying up to her , and gotten intimate with her .
No , I swear on my honor , I haven't , madam .
He's going senile .
But then again he's never really understood his own feelings very well .
Yes , he was hotheaded even in the prime of his life .
Now that he's old , we can expect to have to deal not only with his old character flaws , which have turned into deep-rooted habits , but also with the uncontrollable crabbiness that comes with old age .
We'll probably witness many more outbursts from him , like banishing Kent .
There's still the King of France's farewell ceremony .
Let's put our heads together .
If our father continues to use his authority as usual , then his recent abdication of the kingdom will just hurt us .
We'll have to think about it carefully .
We have to strike while the iron's hot .
I can't stand her .
Please , my lord , don't be friendly with her .
Don't worry about me. , Your sister and the duke are here .
Noble words , sir .
Why are we talking about this ?
Then let's meet with our senior command and discuss what to do next .
I'll meet you at your tent .
Goneril , are you coming with us ?
No .
It's the best thing to do .
Please come with me .
Wait until I read the letter .
I was ordered not to .
When the time comes , tell the herald to blow the trumpet and I'll return .
Goodbye , then .
I'll take a look at your letter .
Prepare your troops .
We'll be ready when the time comes .
Which one of them should I pick ?
Both ?
One ?
Neither ?
I can't enjoy either of them as long as the other one's alive .
Goneril would go crazy if I chose Regan , but it would be hard to get in with Goneril while her husband's still alive .
I'll use Albany's power and authority for now to win the war , but afterward one of the sisters , whichever one wants to , can get rid of him .
If I ever come back , I'll bring you good news .
Good luck , sir .
We have to get out of here , old man .
Let me help you up .
Let's go !
He and his daughter are captured .
Give me your hand .
Come on .
I can't go any further , sir .
Come on .
And that's true too .
Officers , take them away .
Guard them carefully until we decide how to punish them .
No , no , no , no !
Come on , let's go to prison .
The two of us together will sing like birds in a cage .
When you ask for my blessing , I'll get down on my knees and ask you to forgive me .
In prison we'll outlast hordes of rulers that will come and go as their fortunes change .
Take them away .
My Cordelia , even the gods admire how much you've sacrificed for me .
Have I hugged you yet ?
Anyone who wants to separate us will have to smoke us out of the cave of our togetherness like foxes .
Wipe your eyes .
Our jailers will shrivel up with old age before they make us cry again .
We'll watch them starve to death first .
Come on .
Come here , captain .
Listen .
I'll do it , sir .
When you've finished , you'll be a happy man .
Go immediately , and do exactly as I wrote down .
I can't pull a cart or eat dried oats like a horse .
If it's work for a man , I'll do it .
tody of them so I can do what's best out of concern for their honor and the safety of the kingdom .
I sent the French queen with him too , for the same reason .
We need a more appropriate place to discuss Cordelia and her father .
I'm sorry , sir , but in this war I consider you a subordinate , not my equal .
That's for to me to decide .
Not so fast .
He has distinguished himself as a great soldier in his own right , deserving more than any honor your can bestow on him .
He'd really be your proxy if he married you .
You're so infatuated with him that you're hallucinating .
Are you trying to sleep with him ?
Nor is it up to you , my lord .
Yes it is , you half-blood .
Hang on a second .
What a farce !
You've got a sword , Gloucester .
Blow the trumpets .
Oh , I'm sick , sick !
I feel sicker and sicker .
She's not feeling well .
Take her to my tent .
Come here , herald. , Let the trumpet sound ! , Read this out .
Blow the trumpet !
Again !
Again !
Who are you ?
All right then , legitimate brother Edgar , I have to have your lands .
Look out , I'm on my way up .
Kent's been banished just like that ?
All this so suddenly ? , Edmund , what's going on ?
What's the news ?
I've lost my name and title to a traitor .
But I'm as noble as my opponent .
And who is that ?
Who's the spokesman for Edmund , Earl of Gloucester ?
I'm my own spokesman .
What do you have to say to me ?
Here's mine .
Normally I would ask you what your name is first .
still fight you and embed your lies back in your hellish heart. , Trumpets , blow !
You were tricked into fighting , Gloucester .
According to the laws of war , you didn't have to fight a stranger .
I make the laws , not you .
Who can prosecute me for it ?
Oh , monstrous !
Don't ask me what I know .
Follow her .
She's desperate .
I've done everything you accuse me of , and more , much more .
You'll find out everything in due time .
I'm no less noble than you are , Edmund .
If I'm more noble than you , you've done me wrong .
My name is Edgar , and I'm your father's son .
The gods are fair , and they use our little vices to punish us .
You're right .
That's true .
Let me embrace you .
I swear I never hated you or your father !
I know , prince .
Where have you been hiding ?
How did you know what happened to your poor father ?
Listen to my little story , and when it's done , oh , my heart will break !
To escape the decree condemning me
I became his guide , I led him and begged for him , and kept him from suicide .
I never , oh , what a mistake ! , revealed myself to him until half an hour ago , when I was in my armor .
But his frail heart , too weak to grapple with such a conflict between joy and sadness , gave out .
Your words have moved me , and maybe it'll do some good .
But go on .
You look like you have something more to say .
If there's anything more sorrowful left to add , keep it to yourself .
I'm almost ready to break down hearing this much .
This may have seemed like the pinnacle of sadness , but if I went on I could outdo it .
Then I heard the trumpets blow twice , and left him there in a trance .
But who was that man ?
It was Kent , sir , the exiled Kent , who , after the king treated him like an enemy of the state , put on a disguise and followed his king , carrying out tasks unworthy of even a slave .
Help , help , oh , help !
What kind of help do you need ?
Say something , man !
What is that bloody knife ?
It's still warm from the cut .
It was just removed from from the heart of , oh , she's dead !
Who's dead ?
Speak , man .
Your wife , sir , your wife .
And her sister's dead too , poisoned by your wife .
She confessed .
I was engaged to both of them .
All three of us will marry now in death .
Here comes Kent .
I thought the king preferred the Duke of Albany to the Duke of Cornwall .
We used to think so too .
But the way he's divided the kingdom recently , nobody can tell which of the dukes he favors more .
Yes , I've been responsible for his upbringing .
I've had to acknowledge that he's my son so many times that now I can do it without embarrassment .
Do you smell something naughty ?
Well , I wouldn't want to undo the naughtiness , since the boy turned out so well .
But I have a legitimate son a few years older than this one , and I don't love him any more than I love my bastard .
Oh , is that Kent ?
I've come to say farewell to my king and master .
Isn't he here ?
What an enormous thing for us to forget ! , Edmund , tell us , where's the king ?
And where's Cordelia ? , Do you see this , Kent ?
Oh , why is this so ?
Still , Edmund was beloved .
One of the sisters poisoned the other out of love for me , and then killed herself .
Apparently so. , Cover their faces .
I wish I could live longer .
I want to do a little good despite my evil nature .
Go quickly , hurry , to the castle , for I've given orders to have Lear and Cordelia killed .
Hurry , send someone immediately !
Run , run , oh , run !
Whom should we look for in the castle ? , Whose job is it ?
Send something along to prove you're withdrawing the orders .
Good idea .
Take my sword .
The captain , give it to the captain .
Run as if your life depended on it .
My wife and I ordered him to hang Cordelia in prison and then to make it look as if she committed suicide in despair .
Heaven help her ! , Get him out of here for now .
Howl , howl , howl , howl !
Oh , you men are made of stone !
If I were you with eyes and a tongue to speak with , I'd crack heaven wide open with my laments !
She's gone forever .
I know how to tell when someone is alive or dead .
She's as dead as the cold ground .
Let me borrow a mirror .
If her breath steams up the glass , then she's alive .
Or just a foretaste of it ?
Let the world collapse around us .
This feather moved because of her breath .
She's alive .
If that's true , it makes up for all the sorrows I've ever known .
Oh , my good master !
Please , go away .
It's noble Kent , your friend .
Curse you all , you're all murderers and traitors !
I could have saved her .
Now she's gone forever. , Cordelia , Cordelia , stay a while .
Ha ?
It's true , my lords , he did .
Didn't I ?
But I'm old now , and suffering has weakened me .
My vision is dull .
Aren't you Kent ?
That's me .
Your servant Kent .
Where's your servant
He's a good fellow , I can tell you that much .
He's dead and rotting in the dirt now .
No , my lord , that was me .
I'm the one who , I'll get right on that .
followed you on your sad wanderings , ever since your bad luck began .
Nice to see you .
It was me , no one else .
Everything is gloomy , dark , and dreadful .
Your eldest daughters destroyed themselves and died in despair .
Yes , I think that's true .
He doesn't know what he's saying .
Edmund is dead , my lord .
As for me , I'm surrendering all my power over to him , giving him absolute authority for the rest of his life .
And my poor He's fainted. , My lord , my lord !
Don't disturb his soul .
Let it go up to heaven .
Oh , he's really gone .
What's amazing is how long he lasted .
Carry them away .
Our business now is mourning and grief .
Why are you hiding that letter ?
I don't have any news to report , my lord .
What's that paper you were reading ?
It's nothing , my lord .
No ?
Then why did you have to stick it in your pocket in such a hurry ?
If it were nothing , you wouldn't need to hide it .
Please , sir , I beg you .
It's a letter from my brother that I haven't finished reading yet .
Give me that letter , sir .
Now I'll offend you whether I give it to you or not .
The problem is in what the letter says , as far as I can tell .
I hope for my brother's sake that he just wrote it to test my honor .
I will have to go on a journey to death soon , sir .
My master's calling me .
I can't say no .
We must remember the gravity of this sad day .
We should speak what we feel , not what we ought to say .
Come talk to me about this .
If our father were dead you'd receive half of his revenue forever , and you'd have my undying love , Edgar." Hmm , what's this , a conspiracy ?
How could he have even entertained these thoughts in his heart ?
How did you get this letter ?
Who delivered it ?
Nobody delivered it , my lord .
That's what's clever about it .
It was tossed into the window of my room .
You're sure the handwriting is your brother's ?
If he'd written nice things , I'd swear yes right away .
But as it stands , I wish I could believe it wasn't .
But it is his handwriting ?
It's his handwriting , my lord , but I hope he didn't mean what he wrote .
Has he ever tested out these ideas on you before ?
Never , my lord .
But I've often heard him argue that when sons are at their prime and their fathers are declining , the sons should be their fathers ' guardians and manage their fathers ' money .
Oh , what a villain !
That's just what he said in the letter .
Evil villain !
Go look for him .
I'll arrest him .
Horrid villain !
Where is he ?
I'm not sure , my lord .
I'll bet my life that he only wrote this letter to gauge my love for you , and for no other reason .
Do you think so ?
He can't possibly be such a monster , And I'm sure he isn't .
toward his own father who loves him so completely .
Oh , God !
Edmund , go find him .
I'll find him right away , sir , and carry out the business as well as I can .
These recent eclipses of the sun and moon don't bode well for us .
Though science can explain them away , disasters still come after eclipses .
Love cools off , friendships break up , and brothers become enemies .
break out , civil war erupts , kings are betrayed , and the bond between father and son snaps .
This wicked son of mine confirms the prediction , son against father .
The king acts unnaturally , father against child .
We've seen the best our age has to offer .
Conspiracies , fakery , betrayal , and disorder are all that's left until we die .
Find out what this villainous Edgar is thinking , Edmund .
You won't lose any respect .
Just do it carefully. , And to think that the noble and loyal Kent has been banished , for the crime of telling the truth !
It's strange , strange .
This is a classic example of the idiocy of the world : when we're down and out , often because of our own excesses , we put all the blame on the sun , the moon , and the stars , as if they forced us to be bad , or the heavens compelled us to be villainous or stupid .
My father and mother coupled when the demonic moon was descending , and I was born under the Big Dipper , so it's inevitable that I'm rude and oversexed .
I would have been what I am even if the most virginal star in the heavens had twinkled at my conception .
Fa , sol , la , mi .
Hello , brother Edmund .
What are you thinking about so seriously ?
How long have you believed in astrology ?
Come on .
When was the last time you saw my father ?
Why , last night .
Did you speak to him ?
Yes , we talked for a couple of hours .
Did you leave on good terms ?
Did he express any dissatisfaction with you , either in his words or his face ?
No , none at all .
Some villain has told lies about me .
That's what I'm afraid of .
I suggest you lay low until his rage cools a little .
In the meantime , come home with me , and when the time is right I'll take you to talk to him .
Please go .
Here's my key .
If you go outside , arm yourself .
Arm myself ?
Brother , I'm giving you good advice .
Arm yourself .
Now please go .
Will I hear from you soon ?
I'll help you through this business .
A gullible father and a brother who's so innocent that he can't suspect anyone else of wanting to hurt him , these are the two fools I need for my plan to work .
I know exactly how to proceed .
If I can't have an estate by birthright , then I'll get it by being clever .
Any trick that works is good for me .
Did my father hit one of my attendants for scolding his fool ?
Yes , ma'am .
He constantly offends me .
Every hour he comes out with some horrible new offense that puts us all on edge .
I won't stand for it .
His knights are getting out of control , and he himself reprimands us about every little detail .
When he comes back from hunting , I'm not going to speak to him .
Tell him I'm sick .
And if you're not as attentive in serving him as you used to be , that'll be good .
I'll take responsibility for it .
He's coming , ma'am .
I hear him .
Be as lazy and neglectful as you like around him , you and the other servants .
If he doesn't like it , he can go live with my sister .
That useless old man still thinks he can wield all the powers he's given away .
I swear , old fools become like babies again .
Remember what I've told you .
Very well , ma'am .
And make sure the servants are less friendly to his knights .
Don't worry about the consequences .
Tell your men as much .
I want this to provoke confrontations , so I can give him a piece of my mind .
I'll write to my sister and tell her my plans .
Now go , set up for dinner .
If I can disguise my voice as well as my appearance , then I'll be able to carry out my plan perfectly .
I love my master , and he'll find me very hard-working .
Don't make me wait for dinner even a moment .
Get it ready immediately .
A man , sir .
What's your profession ?
What do you want from me ?
But who are you ?
An honest guy who's as poor as the king .
If you're as poor a subject as he is a king , you definitely are poor .
What do you want ?
To work as a servant .
Who do you want to work for ?
You .
Do you know me ?
Authority .
What work can you do ?
I can be discreet in honorable matters , ride a horse , run , tell a good story badly , and deliver a plain message bluntly .
I'm good at everything that ordinary men can do .
The best thing about me is that I'm hardworking .
How old are you ?
Not young enough to fall in love with a woman because she sings well , but not old enough to dote on a woman for any reason .
I'm forty-eight .
Follow me .
You'll work for me .
Where's my fool ? , Go call my fool and have him come here .
No , I don't , my lord .
Very pleased to meet you , my lord .
I look forward to getting to know you better .
I'll try to make myself worth your knowledge .
He's been gone for nine years and he's leaving again soon .
The king is coming .
Go escort the lords of France and Burgundy , Gloucester .
Yes , my lord .
You , sir , where's my daughter ?
I beg your pardon , sir , What did that guy say ?
Call the numbskull back in here .
Where's my fool ?
You'd think everyone was asleep .
So what's going on ?
Where's that dog ?
He says your daughter's not feeling well , my lord .
Why didn't the jerk come back to me when I called him ?
Sir , he told me quite bluntly that he didn't feel like it .
Didn't feel like it ?
My lord , I don't know what's going on , but it seems to me that your highness isn't being treated as politely as before .
The servants , the duke , and your daughter all seem to be treating you less kindly .
Huh !
Do you really mean that ?
Please forgive me if I'm mistaken , my lord , but I can't keep quiet when I think you're being insulted .
No , you're just reminding me of something I've also noticed .
I've felt neglected recently , but I decided that it was more likely that I was being hypersensitive than that they were intentionally unkind .
I'll look into it further .
But where's my fool ?
I haven't seen him for two days .
Ever since Cordelia left for France , sir , the fool has been depressed .
Let's not talk about it .
I've noticed it myself .
Go and tell my daughter I want to speak with her .
And you , go call my fool .
You there , sir , come here please .
Who am I , sir ?
You scoundrel !
You lowlife son-of-a-bitch !
You dog , you peasant !
I won't be hit , my lord .
Now , my friendly servant , thank you .
Wait , let me hire him too. , Here's my fool's cap , a token of my gratitude .
Well hello , my good boy .
How are you doing ?
Why , Fool ?
Why ?
For standing up for this unpopular king .
No , if you can't adjust to political changes , you'll suffer for it .
There , take my fool's cap .
This guy here has banished two of his daughters and blessed the third one without intending to .
If you work for him , you're a fool and should wear a fool's cap. , So how's it going , uncle ?
I wish I had two fool's caps and two daughters .
Why , my boy ?
If I gave them all I own , I'd have two fool's caps for myself .
Here's mine .
Ask your daughters for another one .
Watch out , boy , remember I can whip you .
A constant pain to me !
I'll recite something for you , guy .
Yes , do that .
Listen up , uncle .
Have more than you show , Speak less than you know , Lend less than you owe .
It's nothing .
In that case it's like the words of an unpaid lawyer .
Why , no , boy .
Nothing can be made out of nothing .
You're a bitter fool .
Do you know the difference , my boy , between a bitter fool and a sweet one ?
No , son .
Tell me .
Bring here The gentleman who advised you To give away your land .
You can stand in his place .
The sweet and bitter fool Will appear right away .
The sweet fool in a fool's costume , that's me .
The bitter one is the other one , that's you.LEAR Are you calling me a fool , boy ?
Well , you've given away all your other rightful titles .
No .
Which two crowns would those be ?
Well , when I cut the egg in half and eat the whites , the yolk will be in two parts like two golden crowns .
If I'm telling the truth like a fool in saying all this , whip the first person who thinks I sound foolish .
When did you become so fond of singing , boy ?
I've been singing ever since you made your daughters into your mothers by giving them all your power .
That's when you gave them the spanking paddle and pulled your pants down , Please , uncle , hire a teacher who can teach your fool to lie .
I want to learn how to lie .
If you lie , boy , we'll have you whipped .
I'm amazed how similar you and your daughters are .
They want to whip me for telling the truth , you want to whip me for lying , and sometimes I'm even whipped for keeping quiet .
I'd rather be anything besides a fool .
And yet I wouldn't want to be you , uncle .
Here comes the owner of one piece .
What's going on , daughter ?
Why are you frowning like that ?
I think you've been frowning too much recently .
The man who gives away his crust and his crumbs Will discover that he needs some crumbs back .
will damage your reputation with them , and under ordinary circumstances it would be unfortunate to have them see you as an ogre .
However , this is an extreme situation , and it's more important to control it than to worry about how you'll look .
You know , uncle , A sparrow once raised a cuckoo in its nest Until the cuckoo grew up and bit the sparrow's head off .
So the candle went out and now we're all in the dark .
Are you my daughter ?
Does anyone here know who I am ?
I'm not Lear .
Where are his eyes ?
I don't think so .
Who can tell me who I am ?
You're Lear's shadow .
Daughters who can make you obey them .
This fake astonishment of yours is just like your other pranks .
I'm asking you to understand my point of view .
Since you're old and respected , you should be wise .
But you're keeping a hundred knights here who are so disorderly , vulgar , and obnoxious that our noble court is starting to look like a noisy cheap hotel .
They're such oversexed gluttons that I feel like we're living in a pub or a whorehouse rather than a respectable palace .
It's shameful , and we have to make some changes right away .
Hell and damnation !
Saddle up my horses .
Call my knights together .
You're not really my daughter , but I still have one daughter left .
You hit my servants , and your disorderly mob of knights treat their superiors like servants .
You'll be sorry later , but it'll be too late .
Ingratitude is always hideous , but an ungrateful child is uglier than a sea monster !
Please , sir , be patient .
That may be true , my lord .
Ah , dear Nature , my goddess , listen to me !
Make her sterile and dry up her womb so that no baby will ever come out of her body and honor her .
This land will belong to your and Albany's children forever. , And now what does my second daughter Regan , the wife of Cornwall , have to say ?
Tell me .
Dear gods in heaven , what's the reason for this ?
And then you'll see that despite what you thought , I'll be as powerful as I was before .
You'll see , I promise you .
Did you hear that ?
Goneril , you know how much I love you , but still I have to say , Shush , please .
Come , sir , no more. , Oswald , come here !
A fox you've trapped And such a daughter Should both be slaughtered , If my fool's cap is worth a rope to bind them .
So the fool follows you .
My father can't think straight , a hundred knights !
You may be exaggerating the risks .
That's better than exaggerating our trust .
It's always better to get rid of what you're scared of than to be afraid .
I know how his mind works .
I've written to my sister telling her everything he's said .
If she welcomes him and his hundred knights after I've shown how inappropriately he's behaved , Here , ma'am .
Well , Oswald ?
Have you written that letter to my sister yet ?
Yes , ma'am .
Take some men and horses and go to her .
Add details of your own to back up what I'm saying .
Now go , and hurry back .
But people often screw things up trying to make them better .
No , not at all , All right , all right .
I won't sleep until I've delivered your letter , my lord .
If a man's brain were in his feet , wouldn't it be susceptible to frostbite ?
Yes , boy .
Ha , ha , ha !
Your other daughter Regan will treat you kindly , you'll see .
Even though she's as similar to Goneril as one crabapple is like another , still, I know what I know .
And what do you know , boy ?
I know that Regan will taste just like Goneril , both of them sour crabapples .
Do you know why the nose is in the middle of a person's face ?
No .
Why , to keep the eyes on the sides , so that you can see anything that you can't sniff out .
I was wrong to her , Do you know how an oyster makes its shell ?
No .
Me neither .
But I know why a snail carries its house on its back .
Why ?
He can't give his house away to his daughters , leaving himself without shelter .
I want to forget what I am .
Such a kind father ! , Are my horses ready ?
Your attendant asses are getting the horses ready .
There's a nice reason why the constellation Pleiades has only seven stars in it .
Because it doesn't have eight ?
That's right .
You'd make a good fool .
I could take back my crown by force , What outrageous ingratitude !
If you were my fool , uncle , I'd have you beaten for getting old before your time .
How's that ?
You're not supposed to get old until you're wise .
Oh , dear God , don't let me go mad !
Keep me balanced and sane .
I don't want to go mad .
They're ready , my lord .
Come on , boy .
Hello , Curan .
Hello , sir .
I just saw your father the Lord Gloucester and notified him that the Duke of Cornwall and his wife Regan will stay with him here tonight .
Why is that ?
I don't know .
You haven't heard of the war brewing between the Dukes of Cornwall and Albany ?
Not a word .
You may hear about it soon .
Goodbye , sir .
The duke will be here tonight ?
His arrival fits perfectly into my plan .
Fast work and a little luck are all I need. , Brother , could I have a word with you ?
Come down , brother .
Father is on the lookout .
Get out of here quickly !
It has leaked out that you're hiding here .
You haven't said anything against the Duke of Cornwall , have you ?
He's rushing on his way here right now , and Regan's with him .
Think about it .
I hear my father coming .
Forgive me .
I have to pretend to threaten you with my sword .
Be convincing .
Edmund , where's your wicked brother ?
Look , sir , I'm bleeding .
Where is the villain , Edmund ?
He ran out that way , sir , when he couldn't , Follow him , now !
Go .
When he couldn't what ?
In short , when I told him how firmly opposed I was to his hideous plan , he pulled out his sword and lunged at my defenseless body , cutting my arm .
Bolstered by righteousness , I prepared to fight , and when he saw my excitement , or perhaps because my shouting scared him , he ran away suddenly .
Let him run far away .
If he stays in this country he'll be found .
The Duke of Cornwall , my master and patron , is arriving tonight .
joy except my love for you , and I find that only your majesty's love makes me happy .
Speak .
Nothing , my lord .
Nothing ?
Nothing .
Come on , "nothing" will get you nothing .
Try again .
I don't have a talent for putting my heart's feelings into words .
I love you as a child should love her father , neither more nor less .
What are you saying , Cordelia ?
Revise your statement , or you may damage your inheritance .
justice will be rewarded .
He answered , "You penniless bastard !
Do you really think that if it came down to my word against yours , anyone would believe you ?
No .
I'd deny whatever evidence you had against me , even if it were in my own handwriting , and turn it all into evidence against you and your plans for treachery .
And you must think people are stupid if you believe they wouldn't realize all the motives you have for trying to kill me." Oh , how monstrously evil !
He said he would deny that he wrote his letter ?
The duke's trumpets .
I don't know why he's come here .
I'll forbid all ships from leaving our harbors .
The villain won't escape .
The duke will agree with me on that .
How are you , my friend ?
Ever since I arrived here , just now , I've been hearing strange rumors .
How are you , my lord ?
Oh , madam , my old heart is broken , broken .
Oh , my lady , I'm ashamed to admit it .
Wasn't he friends with all those brawling knights who serve my father ?
I don't know , madam .
Oh , it's too terrible .
To answer your question , ma'am , yes , he was friendly with those knights .
Then it's no surprise they had a bad influence on him .
They probably put him up to killing old man Gloucester to get his money .
Tonight I received a letter from my sister telling me all about them , and warning me not be at home in case they come to stay at my house .
And I won't be there either. , Edmund , I'm told you've acted like a true son to your father .
I just did my duty , sir .
He exposed Edgar's murderous plot , and was wounded , as you see there , when trying to apprehend him .
Are your men searching for him ?
Yes , my lord .
If he's caught , he'll never make trouble for anyone again .
I need people as trustworthy as you .
I'll always be loyal to you , sir .
You don't know why we came to visit you , Yes , and so unexpectedly , at night .
Their messengers are ready , waiting to deliver our response in these matters .
So please , old friend , give us some good advice .
I'm at your service , madam .
Both of you are very welcome here .
Good morning to you , friend .
Do you work in this house ?
Yes , I do .
Where should we stable our horses ?
In the mud .
Please , sir , be kind to me and tell me .
I won't be kind to you .
In that case , I don't much care for you either .
If I could get my hands on you , I'd make you care .
Why are you talking to me like this ?
I don't even know you .
Ah , but I know you .
Who am I then ?
What an ogre you are to slander someone you don't know , and who doesn't know you !
What a shameless jerk you are to pretend you don't know me !
It was just two days ago that I tripped you and beat you up in front of the king .
Draw your sword , scoundrel .
I'll make ground beef out of you .
Get away from me !
I've got nothing to do with you .
Draw your sword , you jerk !
You come here with letters against the king , and you take his conceited daughter's side against his royal highness .
Draw your sword , scoundrel , or I'll slice your thighs like flank steak .
Draw your sword !
Come on !
Help !
Murderer !
Help !
Stand and fight , you overdressed servant , fight !
Help !
Murder , murder !
Macbeth .
Then stay with us .
There's still a bit of daylight in the sky .
Now all the late travellers are hurrying to reach their inns .
The rest of the king's guests are already inside .
That's him .
Prepare yourselves .
It will rain tonight .
Then let the rain come down .
Oh , this is treachery !
Get out of here , good Fleance , run , run , run !
Someday you can get revenge. , Oh , you bastard !
Who put out the light ?
Wasn't that the best thing to do ?
There's only one body here .
The son ran away .
We failed in half of our mission .
Well , let's get out of here and tell Macbeth what we did accomplish .
From the highest to the lowest of you , I bid you a hearty welcome .
Thanks to your majesty .
I will walk around and mingle with all of you , playing the humble host .
Say welcome to all of our friends for me , sir , for in my heart they are all welcome .
And they respond to you with their hearts as well .
The table is full on both sides .
I will sit here in the middle .
Be free and happy .
Soon we will toast around the table .
Then it must be Banquo's .
My lord , his throat is cut .
I did that to him .
You are the best of the cutthroats .
If you cut both their throats , then you are the absolute best .
Most royal sir , Fleance has escaped .
Now I'm scared again .
Otherwise I would have been perfect , as solid as a piece of marble , as firm as a rock , as free as the air itself .
Yes , my good lord .
He's lying dead in a ditch , with twenty deep gashes in his head , any one of which would have been enough to kill him .
Thanks for that .
The adult snake lies in the ditch .
The young snake that escaped will in time become poisonous and threatening , but for now he has no fangs .
Get out of here .
I'll talk to you again tomorrow .
My royal lord , you're not entertaining the guests .
When you just want to eat , it's better to do that at home .
Where have you been , sister ?
Killing pigs .
And you , sister ?
A sailor's wife had chestnuts in her lap and munched away at them .
Give me one , " I said .
Get away from me , witch ! " the fat woman cried .
How nice of you !
And I will give you some more .
I'll drain the life out of him .
He won't catch a wink of sleep , either at night or during the day .
He will live as a cursed man .
For eighty-one weeks he will waste away in agony .
It's nice of you to remind me .
Why don't you have a seat , your highness ?
His absence means he's broken his promise , sir .
If it pleases you , your highness , why don't you sit with us and grace us with your royal company ?
The table's full .
Here's an empty seat , sir .
Where ?
What , my good lord ?
Gentlemen , stand up .
His highness is not well .
Sit down , worthy friends .
My husband is often like this , and he has been since he was a child .
Please stay seated .
If you pay too much attention to him you'll make him angry , and that will make his convulsions go on longer .
Eat your dinner and pay no attention to him .
Yes , and a brave one , who dares to look at something that would frighten the devil .
Oh , that's nonsense !
This is just another one of the hallucinations you always get when you're afraid .
These outbursts of yours don't even look like real fear .
They're more like how you would act if you were a woman telling a scary story by the fireside in front of her grandmother .
Shame on you !
Why are you making these faces ?
When the vision passes , you'll see that you're just looking at a stool .
Please , just look over there .
Look !
Look !
As sure as I'm standing here , I saw him .
Nonsense !
It used to be that when you knocked a man's brains out he would just die , and that would be it .
But now they rise from the dead with twenty fatal head wounds and push us off our stools .
This haunting business is even stranger than murder .
My worthy lord , your noble friends miss your company .
Too bad it's spoiling our pleasure tonight .
Come at me in the form of a rugged Russian bear , an armor-plated rhinoceros , or a tiger from Iran .
Or come back to life again and challenge me to a duel in some deserted place .
If I tremble then , you can call me a little girl .
Get out of here , you horrible ghost , you hallucination .
Get out !
I am a man again .
Pray you sit still .
Please , remain seated .
What things , my lord ?
Please , don't speak to him .
He's getting worse and worse .
Talk makes him crazy .
Good night .
A kind good night to all !
Gravestones have been known to move , and trees to speak , to bring guilty men to justice .
It's almost morning .
Did you send for him , sir ?
I've heard about this indirectly , but I will send for him .
In every one of the lords ' households I have a servant paid to spy for me .
Tomorrow , while it's still early , I will go see the witches .
They will tell me more , because I'm determined to know the worst about what's going to happen .
My own safety is the only important thing now .
I have to do these things before I have a chance to think about them .
Yes , let's go to sleep .
My strange self-delusions just come from inexperience .
We're still just beginners when it comes to crime .
What's wrong , Hecate ?
You look angry .
Don't I have a reason to be angry , you disobedient hags ?
But you can make it up to me .
Go away now and in the morning meet me in the pit by the river in hell .
Macbeth will go there to learn his destiny .
You bring your cauldrons , your spells , your charms , and everything else .
I'm about to fly away .
I'll spend tonight working to make something horrible happen .
I have a lot to do before noon .
An important droplet is hanging from the corner of the moon .
I'll catch it before it falls to the ground .
When I work it over with magic spells , the drop will produce magical spirits that will trick Macbeth with illusions .
He will be fooled into thinking he is greater than fate , he will mock death , and he will think he is above wisdom , grace , and fear .
As you all know , overconfidence is man's greatest enemy .
Listen !
I'm being called .
Look , my little spirit is sitting in a foggy cloud waiting for me .
All I'm saying is that strange things have been going on .
Clearly , men should not go out walking too late !
And who can help thinking how monstrous it was for Malcolm and Donalbain to kill their gracious father ?
Those are the things we pine for now .
Macbeth has heard this news and he is so angry that he's preparing for war .
Did he tell Macduff to return to Scotland ?
I'll send my prayers with him .
Although I can't make his ship disappear , I can still make his journey miserable .
Look what I have here .
Show me , show me .
A drum , a drum !
Macbeth has come .
The tawny cat has meowed three times .
My spirit friend , Harpier , is yelling , "It's time , it's time ! " Dance around the cauldron and throw in the poisoned entrails .
Double , double toil and trouble , Fire burn , and cauldron bubble .
Double , double toil and trouble , Fire burn and cauldron bubble .
Double , double toil and trouble , Fire burn and cauldron bubble .
We'll cool the mixture with baboon blood .
Well done !
I admire your efforts , and all of you will share the rewards .
Now come sing around the cauldron like a ring of elves and fairies , enchanting everything you put in .
I can tell that something wicked is coming by the tingling in my thumbs .
Doors , open up for whoever is knocking !
What's going on here , you secret , evil , midnight hags ?
What are you doing ?
Something there isn't a word for .
Tell me what I want to know .
Speak .
Demand .
We'll answer .
Would you rather hear these things from our mouths or from our master's ?
Call them .
Let me see them .
Pour in the blood of a sow who has eaten her nine offspring .
Tell me , you unknown power , He can read your thoughts .
Listen , but don't speak .
Macbeth !
Macbeth !
Macbeth !
Beware Macduff .
Beware the thane of Fife .
Let me go .
Enough .
Whatever you are , thanks for your advice .
You have guessed exactly what I feared .
But one word more , He will not be commanded by you .
Here's another , stronger than the first .
Macbeth !
If I had three ears I'd listen with all three .
Be violent , bold , and firm .
Laugh at the power of other men , because nobody born from a woman will ever harm Macbeth .
But even so , I'll make doubly sure .
That way I can conquer my own fear and sleep easy at night .
What is this spirit that looks like the son of a king and wears a crown on his young head ?
Listen but don't speak to it .
Be brave like the lion and proud .
Macbeth will never be defeated until Birnam Wood marches to fight you at Dunsinane Hill .
That will never happen .
Who can command the forest and make the trees pull their roots out of the earth ?
These were sweet omens !
Good !
My murders will never come back to threaten me until the forest of Birnam gets up and moves , and I will be king for my entire natural life .
But my heart is still throbbing to know one thing .
Tell me , if your dark powers can see this far : will Banquo's sons ever reign in this kingdom ?
Don't try to find out more .
I demand to be satisfied .
If you refuse , let an eternal curse fall on you .
Let me know .
Why is that cauldron sinking ?
And what is that music ?
Show .
Show .
Show .
Show him and make him grieve .
Come like shadows and depart in the same way !
You look too much like the ghost of Banquo .
Go away !
What ?
Is this true ?
Come , sisters , let's cheer him up and show him our talents .
Where are they ?
Gone ?
Let this evil hour be marked forever in the calendar as cursed .
What does your grace want ?
Did you see the weird sisters ?
No , my lord .
Didn't they pass by you ?
No , indeed , my lord .
I heard the galloping of horses .
Who was it that came here ?
Two or three men , my lord , who brought the message that Macduff has fled to England .
Fled to England ?
Yes , my good lord .
Time , you thwart my dreadful plans .
No more foolish talk .
I will do this deed before I lose my sense of purpose .
But no more spooky visions ! , Where are the messengers ?
Come , bring me to them .
What did he do that made him flee this land ?
You have to be patient , madam .
He had no patience .
He was crazy to run away .
Even if you're not a traitor , you're going to look like one if you run away .
You don't know whether it was wisdom or fear that made him flee .
How could it be wisdom !
To leave his wife , his children , his house , and his titles in a place so unsafe that he himself flees it !
Even the fragile wren , the smallest of birds , will fight against the owl when it threatens her young ones in the nest .
His running away has everything to do with fear and nothing to do with love .
My dearest relative , I'm begging you , pull yourself together .
As for your husband , he is noble , wise , and judicious , and he understands what the times require .
I'll say good-bye now .
It won't be long before I'm back .
When things are at their worst they have to stop , or else improve to the way things were before .
He has a father , and yet he is fatherless .
If I stay longer , I'll embarrass you and disgrace myself by crying .
I'm leaving now .
Young man , your father's dead .
What are you going to do now ?
How are you going to live ?
What ?
Are you going to start eating worms and flies ?
I mean I will live on whatever I get , like birds do .
You'd be a pitiful bird .
You wouldn't know enough to be afraid of traps .
No matter what you say , my father is not dead .
Yes , he is dead .
What are you going to do for a father ?
Maybe you should ask , what will you do for a husband ?
Oh , I can buy twenty husbands at any market .
Speak , if you can .
All hail , Macbeth !
Hail to you , thane of Glamis !
All hail , Macbeth !
Hail !
Hail !
Hail !
You are lesser than Macbeth but also greater .
You are not as happy as Macbeth , yet much happier .
Your descendants will be kings , even though you will not be one .
So all hail , Macbeth and Banquo !
If so , you'd be buying them to sell again .
You talk like a child , but you're very smart anyway .
Was my father a traitor , Mother ?
Yes , he was .
What is a traitor ?
Someone who makes a promise and breaks it .
And is everyone who swears and lies a traitor ?
Everyone who does so is a traitor and should be hanged .
And should everyone who makes promises and breaks them be hanged ?
Everyone .
Who should hang them ?
The honest men .
Then the liars are fools , for there are enough liars in the world to beat up the honest men and hang them .
If he were dead , you'd be weeping for him .
If you aren't weeping , it's a good sign that I'll soon have a new father .
Silly babbler , how you talk !
Bless you , fair lady !
You don't know me , but I know you're an important person .
I'm afraid something dangerous is coming toward you .
If you'll take a simple man's advice , don't be here when it arrives .
Go away and take your children .
I feel bad for scaring you like this , but it would be much worse for me to let you come to harm .
And harm is getting close !
Heaven keep you safe !
Where should I go ?
I haven't done anything wrong .
But I have to remember that I'm here on Earth , where doing evil is often praised , and doing good is sometimes a stupid and dangerous mistake .
So then why should I offer this womanish defense that I'm innocent ?
Who are these men ?
Where is your husband ?
I hope he's not anywhere so disreputable that thugs like you can find him .
He's a traitor .
You're lying , you shaggy-haired villain !
What's that , you runt ?
He has killed me , Mother .
Run away , I beg you !
Let's seek out some shady place where we can sit down alone and cry our hearts out .
Instead of crying , let's keep hold of our swords and defend our fallen homeland like honorable men .
Each day new widows howl , new orphans cry , and new sorrows slap heaven in the face , until it sounds like heaven itself feels Scotland's anguish and screams in pain .
What you just said may perhaps be true .
This tyrant , whose mere name is so awful it hurts us to say it , was once considered an honest man .
You were one of his favorites .
He hasn't done anything to harm you yet .
It would be smart to offer someone poor and innocent like me as a sacrificial lamb to satisfy an angry god like Macbeth .
I am not treacherous .
But Macbeth is .
Even someone with a good and virtuous nature might give way to a royal command .
But I beg your pardon .
My fears can't actually make you evil .
Angels are still bright even though Lucifer , the brightest angel , fell from heaven .
Even though everything evil wants to look good , good still has to look good too .
Why did you leave your wife and child vulnerable , the most precious things in your life , those strong bonds of love ?
But I beg you , don't interpret my suspicions as slander against you .
You may really be honest , no matter what I think .
Bleed , bleed , poor country !
I wouldn't be the villain you think I am even if I were offered all of Macbeth's kingdom and the riches of the East too .
Don't be offended .
I don't completely distrust you .
I do think Scotland is sinking under Macbeth's oppression .
Our country weeps , it bleeds , and each day a fresh cut is added to her wounds .
The English have promised me thousands of troops .
Who are you talking about ?
Even in hell you couldn't find a devil worse than Macbeth .
I admit that he's murderous , lecherous , greedy , lying , deceitful , violent , malicious , and guilty of every sin that has a name .
But there is no end , absolutely none , to my sexual desires .
Your wives , your daughters , your old women , and your young maids together could not satisfy my lust .
It would be better for Macbeth to rule than someone like me .
Endless greed and lust in a man's nature is a kind of tyranny .
It has caused the downfall of many kings .
But don't be afraid to take the crown that belongs to you .
There are more than enough willing women around .
Greed has been the downfall of many kings .
But I don't have any good sides .
No , if I had power I would take world peace and throw it down to hell .
Oh Scotland , Scotland !
If someone like me is fit to be king , let me know .
I'm still a virgin .
Indeed , before you arrived here , old Siward , with ten thousand soldiers already prepared for battle , was making his way here .
Why are you silent ?
It's hard to make sense of such different stories .
Well , we'll speak more soon .
Yes , sir .
Their illness confounds the most advanced techniques of modern medicine , but when he touches them , they heal immediately because of the power granted to him by heaven .
Thank you , doctor .
What disease is he talking about ?
It's called the evil .
Edward's healing touch is a miracle that I have seen him perform many times during my stay in England .
Along with this strange power , he also has the gift of prophecy and various other abilities .
Who's that coming over here ?
By his dress I can tell he's my countryman , but I don't recognize him .
My noble kinsman , welcome .
Hello , sir .
Is Scotland the same as when I left it ?
Alas , our poor country !
It's too frightened to look at itself .
Oh , your report is too poetic , but it sounds so true !
Banquo and Macbeth , all hail !
Stay and tell me more .
Tell me where you learned these strange things , and why you stop us at this desolate place with this prophetic greeting ?
Speak , I command you .
The earth has bubbles , just like the water , and these creatures must have come from a bubble in the earth .
Where did they disappear to ?
I wish they had stayed !
Were these things we're talking about really here ?
Or are we both on drugs ?
Your children will be kings .
You will be the king .
Isn't that what they said ?
That's exactly what they said .
Who's this ?
How is my wife ?
She's well .
And all my children ?
They're well too .
What's the news ?
Now is the time when we need your help .
Gracious King Edward has sent us noble Siward and ten thousand soldiers .
I wish I could repay this happy news with good news of my own .
What is this news about ?
If it's for me , don't keep it from me .
Let me have it now .
I think I can guess what you're about to say .
Your wife and children were savagely slaughtered .
Merciful heaven !
They killed my children too ?
They killed your wife , your children , your servants , anyone they could find .
And I had to be away !
My wife was killed too ?
I said she was .
Take comfort .
He doesn't have children .
All my pretty little children ?
Did you say all ?
Oh , that bird from hell !
All of them ?
What , all my children and their mother dead in one fell swoop ?
Fight it like a man .
I can't help remembering the things that were most precious to me .
Did heaven watch the slaughter and not send down any help ?
Sinful Macduff , they were killed because of you !
As wicked as I am , they were slaughtered because of me , not because of anything they did .
May God give their souls rest .
Let this anger sharpen your sword .
Transform your grief into anger .
I could go on weeping like a woman and bragging about how I will avenge them !
But gentle heavens , don't keep me waiting .
Bring me face to face with Macbeth , that devil of Scotland .
Put him within the reach of my sword , and if he escapes , may heaven forgive him as well !
Now you sound like a man .
Come on , let's go see King Edward .
The army is ready .
Macbeth is ripe for the picking .
Cheer up as much as you can .
I've stayed up with you for two nights now , and I haven't seen any evidence of what you were talking about .
When was the last time you saw her sleepwalking ?
Since Macbeth went to war , I have seen her rise from her bed , put on her nightgown , unlock her closet , take out some paper , fold it , write on it , read it , seal it up , and then return to bed , remaining asleep the entire time .
When she is like this , besides walking and performing various activities , have you heard her say anything ?
She says something , sir , but I will not repeat it to you .
I will not confess it to you nor to anyone else , because there was no one else to witness her speech .
Look , here she comes !
This is exactly how she always looks , and , I swear it , she is fast asleep .
Watch her .
How did she get that candle ?
It stands by her bedside .
She always has to have a light next to her .
Those are her orders .
You see , her eyes are open .
Yes , but they don't see anything .
What's she doing now ?
Look how she rubs her hands .
She looks like she's washing her hands .
There's still a spot here .
Listen !
She's talking .
I'll write down what she says , so I'll remember it better .
Did you hear that ?
The thane of Fife had a wife .
Where is she now ? , What , will my hands never be clean ? , No more of that , my lord , no more of that .
You've heard something you shouldn't have .
She said something she shouldn't have said , I'm sure of that .
Heaven knows what secrets she's keeping .
I still have the smell of blood on my hand .
All the perfumes of Arabia couldn't make my little hand smell better .
Oh , oh , oh !
What a heavy sigh !
Her heart is carrying a heavy weight .
I wouldn't want a heart like hers even if you made me queen .
Well , well , well .
I hope what she's saying is well , sir !
This disease is beyond my medical skills .
But I have known people who sleepwalked and weren't guilty of anything .
Wash your hands .
Put on your nightgown .
Is this true ?
To bed , to bed !
There's a knocking at the gate .
Will she go to bed now ?
Yes , right away .
Unnatural acts will cause Good night , good doctor .
The English army is near , led by Malcolm , his uncle Siward , and the good Macduff .
They burn for revenge .
Does anyone know if Donalbain is with his brother ?
He is definitely not there , sir .
I have a list of all the important men .
What is the tyrant Macbeth doing ?
He is fortifying his castle at Dunsinane with heavy defenses .
One thing is certain : he's out of control .
Who can blame him for acting crazy , when inside he condemns himself for everything he's done ?
Let's proceed on our march to Birnam .
He was also shocked to learn that on the same day you fought the rebels you also fought against the army of Norway , and that you weren't the least bit afraid of death , even as you killed everyone around you .
Messenger after messenger delivered news of your bravery to the king with praise for how you defended his country .
The king sent us to give you his thanks and to bring you to him .
Why are you giving me his title ?
I don't know whether he fought on Norway's side , or if he secretly aided the rebels , or if he fought with both of our enemies .
Don't bring me any more reports .
Until Birnam Wood gets up and moves to Dunsinane , I won't be affected by fear .
What's the boy Malcolm ?
Wasn't he born from a woman ?
The spirits that know the future have told me this : "Don't be afraid , Macbeth .
No man born from a woman will ever defeat you." So get out of here , disloyal thanes , and join the weak and decadent English !
My mind and courage will never falter with doubt or shake with fear .
May the devil turn you black , you white-faced fool !
Why do you look like a frightened goose ?
There are ten thousand , Geese , you idiot ?
Soldiers , sir .
Go pinch your cheeks and bring some color back into your face , you cowardly boy .
What soldiers , fool ?
Curse you !
That pale face of yours will frighten the others as well .
What soldiers , milk-face ?
The English army , sir .
Get out of my sight .
Seyton ! , I'm sick at heart when I see , Seyton , come here ! , This battle will either secure my reign forever or else topple me from the throne .
I have lived long enough .
Seyton !
What do you want ?
Is there more news ?
All the rumors have been confirmed .
I'll fight until they hack the flesh off my bones .
Give me my armor .
You don't need it yet .
I'll put it on anyway .
Send out more cavalry .
Give me my armor .
She is not sick , my lord , but she is troubled with endless visions that keep her from sleeping .
Cure her of that .
For that kind of relief , the patient must heal herself .
Medicine is for the dogs .
I won't have anything to do with it .
Yes , my good lord .
Your preparation for war sounds like something .
Kinsmen , I hope the time is coming when people will be safe in their own bedrooms .
We don't doubt it .
What's the name of this forest behind us ?
Birnam Wood .
Tell every soldier to break off a branch and hold it in front of him .
That way we can conceal how many of us there are , and Macbeth's spies will give him inaccurate reports .
We'll do it .
We shouldn't make any judgments until we achieve our goal .
Hang our flags on the outer walls .
Everyone keeps yelling , "Here they come ! " Our castle is strong enough to laugh off their seige .
They can sit out there until they die of hunger and disease .
If it weren't for the fact that so many of our soldiers revolted and joined them , we could have met them out in front of the castle , man to man , and beaten them back to England .
What's that noise ?
It's women crying , my good lord .
I've almost forgotten what fear feels like .
There was a time when I would have been terrified by a shriek in the night , and the hair on my skin would have stood up when I heard a ghost story .
What was that cry for ?
The queen is dead , my lord .
She would have died later anyway .
Tomorrow , and tomorrow , and tomorrow .
Out , out , brief candle .
Life is a story told by an idiot , full of noise and emotional disturbance but devoid of meaning .
My gracious lord , I should tell you what I saw , but I don't know how to say it .
Just say it .
As I was standing watch on the hill , I looked toward Birnam , and I thought I saw the forest begin to move .
Liar and slave !
Punish me if it's not true .
Three miles from here you can see it coming , a moving forest .
If you're lying , I'll hang you alive from the nearest tree until you die of hunger .
If what you say is true , you can do the same to me .
We're close enough now .
Good luck .
If we meet Macbeth's army tonight , let us be beaten if we can not fight .
They have me tied to a stake .
I can't run away .
You'll be afraid to hear it .
No I won't , even if you were one of the worst demons in hell .
My name's Macbeth .
The devil himself couldn't say a name I hate more .
No , nor could the devil's name be more frightening .
You lie , you disgusting tyrant .
I'll prove with my sword that I'm not scared of you .
You were born from a woman .
Swords don't frighten me .
I laugh at any weapon used by a man who was born from a woman .
But this whole thing is strange .
The noise is coming from over there .
Tyrant , show your face !
I'll either fight you , Macbeth , or else I'll put down my sword unused .
You must be over there .
Come this way , my lord .
Our noblemen are battling bravely .
Sir , enter the castle .
Turn around , you dog from hell , turn around !
But go away now .
I have nothing to say to you .
My sword will talk for me .
You are too evil for words !
You might as well try to stab the air with your sword .
I lead a charmed life , which can't be ended by anyone born from a woman .
I won't fight you .
Then surrender , coward , and we'll put you in a freakshow , just like they do with deformed animals .
We'll put a picture of you on a sign , right above the words "Come see the tyrant ! " I'm not going to surrender and have to kiss the ground in front of Malcolm , or be taunted by the common people .
Even though Birnam Wood really did come to Dunsinane , and I'm fighting a man not of woman born , I'll fight to the end .
I'll put up my shield and battle you .
Come on , let's go at it , Macduff , and damn the first man who cries , 'Stop !
Enough !
Macduff is missing , and so is your noble son .
My lord , your son has paid the soldier's price : death .
He only lived long enough to become a man , and as soon as he proved that he was a man by fighting like one , he died .
So he's dead ?
Yes , and he's been carried off the field .
Your grief should not be equal to his worth , because then your sorrow would never end .
Were his wounds on his front side ?
Yes , on his front .
Well then , he's God's soldier now !
If I had as many sons as I have hairs on my head , I couldn't hope that any of them would die more honorably than he did .
And that's all there is to it .
He is worth more mourning than that , and I will mourn for him .
He is worth no more than that .
They tell me he died well , and settled his scores .
With that , I hope God is with him !
Here comes better news .
Hail , king !
Because that's what you are now .
Look , here I have Macbeth's cursed head .
We are free from his tyranny .
Hail , King of Scotland !
My thanes and kinsmen , I name you all earls , the first earls that Scotland has ever had .
So I thank you all , and I invite each and every one of you to come watch me be crowned king of Scotland at Scone .
Look at Macbeth , he's in a daze .
Good Macbeth , we're ready when you are .
Kind gentlemen , I won't forget the trouble you've taken for me whenever I think of this day .
Let's go to the king .
Absolutely .
Until then , we've said enough .
My king , they haven't come back yet .
But I spoke with someone who saw Cawdor die , and he said that Cawdor openly confessed his treasons , begged your highness's forgiveness , and repented deeply .
He never did anything in his whole life that looked as good as the way he died .
He died like someone who had practiced how to toss away his most cherished possession as if it were a worthless a piece of garbage .
There's no way to read a man's mind by looking at his face .
You are welcome here .
With that , I'll be off .
My worthy Cawdor !
When should the three of us meet again ?
Will it be in thunder , lightning , or rain ?
That will happen before sunset .
Where should we meet ?
We'll meet Macbeth there .
When I tried desperately to question them further , they vanished into thin air .
While I stood spellbound , messengers from the king arrived and greeted me as the thane of Cawdor , which is precisely how the weird sisters had saluted me before calling me 'the future king !
What news do you bring ?
The king is coming here tonight .
You must be crazy to say that !
He sent a messenger ahead of him who arrived here so out of breath that he could barely speak his message .
Take good care of him .
He brings great news .
My dearest love , Duncan is coming here tonight .
And when is he leaving ?
He plans to leave tomorrow .
That day will never come .
Your face betrays strange feelings , my lord , and people will be able to read it like a book .
Greet the king with a welcoming expression in your eyes , your hands , and your words .
You should look like an innocent flower , but be like the snake that hides underneath the flower .
We will speak about this further .
Leave all the rest to me .
This castle is in a pleasant place .
The air is sweet and appeals to my refined senses .
The fact that this summer bird , the house martin , builds his nests here proves how inviting the breezes are .
There isn't a single protrusion in the castle walls where these birds haven't built their hanging nests to sleep and breed .
I've noticed that they always like to settle and mate where the air is the nicest .
Look , here comes our honored hostess !
Sometimes the love my subjects bring me is inconvenient , but I still accept it as love .
Fair and noble hostess , we are your guests tonight .
We are your servants , your highness , and as always our house and everything in it is at your disposal , for after all , we keep it in your trust and we're glad to give you back what's yours .
Give me your hand .
Bring me to my host , Macbeth .
I love him dearly , and I shall continue to favor him .
Whenever you're ready , hostess .
If this business would really be finished when I did the deed , then it would be best to get it over with quickly .
What news do you have ?
He has almost finished dinner .
Why did you leave the dining room ?
Has he asked for me ?
Don't you know he has ?
We can't go on with this plan .
The king has just honored me , and I have earned the good opinion of all sorts of people .
Were you drunk when you seemed so hopeful before ?
From now on this is what I'll think of your love .
Are you afraid to act the way you desire ?
You're like the poor cat in the old story .
If you weren't a man , then what kind of animal were you when you first told me you wanted to do this ?
And whatever we do , we can lay all the blame on the drunken servants .
May you only give birth to male children , because your fearless spirit should create nothing that isn't masculine .
Once we have covered the two servants with blood , and used their daggers to kill , won't people believe that they were the culprits ?
Go now , and pretend to be a friendly hostess .
Hide with a false pleasant face what you know in your false , evil heart .
How's the night going , boy ?
The moon has set .
The clock hasn't struck yet .
The moon sets at twelve , right ?
I think it's later than that , sir .
Here , take my sword .
The heavens are being stingy with their light .
Take this , too .
I'm tired and feeling heavy , but I can't sleep .
Merciful powers , keep away the nightmares that plague me when I rest !
Give me my sword .
Who's there ?
A friend .
You're not asleep yet , sir ?
The king's in bed .
He's been in an unusually good mood and has granted many gifts to your household and servants .
This diamond is a present from him to your wife for her boundless hospitality .
Because we were unprepared for the king's visit , we weren't able to entertain him as well as we would have wanted to .
Who is this bloody man ?
Judging from his appearance , I bet he can tell us the latest news about the revolt .
This is the brave sergeant who fought to keep me from being captured .
Hail , brave friend !
Tell the king what was happening in the battle when you left it .
The armies were like two exhausted swimmers clinging to each other and struggling in the water , unable to move .
My brave relative !
What a worthy man !
Everything's OK .
I had a dream last night about the three witches .
I don't think about them now .
But when we have an hour to spare we can talk more about it , if you're willing .
Whenever you like .
If you stick with me , when the time comes , there will be something in it for you .
Rest easy in the meantime .
Thank you , sir .
You do the same .
Is this a dagger I see in front of me , with its handle pointing toward my hand ?
I'm going now .
Don't listen to the bell , Duncan , because it summons you either to heaven or to hell .
The alcohol that got the servants drunk has made me bold .
The same liquor that quenched their thirst has fired me up .
Listen !
Quiet !
My husband !
I have done the deed .
Did you hear a noise ?
I heard the owl scream and the crickets cry .
Didn't you say something ?
When ?
Just now .
As I came down ?
Yes .
Listen !
Who's sleeping in the second chamber ?
Donalbain .
That's a stupid thing to say .
One servant cried , "God bless us ! " and the other replied , "Amen , " as if they had seen my bloody hands .
Listening to their frightened voices , I couldn't reply "Amen" when they said "God bless us ! " Don't think about it so much .
But why couldn't I say "Amen" ?
I desperately needed God's blessing , but the word "Amen" stuck in my throat .
We can't think that way about what we did .
If we do , it'll drive us crazy .
I thought I heard a voice cry , "Sleep no more !
What are you talking about ?
The voice kept crying , "Sleep no more ! " to everyone in the house .
Go get some water and wash this bloody evidence from your hands .
Why did you carry these daggers out of the room ?
They have to stay there .
Go take them back and smear the sleeping guards with the blood .
Coward !
Give me the daggers .
Only children are afraid of scary pictures .
If Duncan bleeds I'll paint the servants ' faces with his blood .
Where is that knocking coming from ?
What's happening to me , that I'm frightened of every noise ?
I hear someone knocking at the south entry .
Let's go back to our bedroom .
A little water will wash away the evidence of our guilt .
It's so simple !
You've lost your resolve .
Listen !
There's more knocking .
Put on your nightgown , in case someone comes and sees that we're awake .
Snap out of your daze .
Wake Duncan with your knocking .
I wish you could !
Knock , knock , knock !
Knock , knock !
Who's there , in the other devil's name ?
Come on in , con man .
Knock , knock , knock !
Who's there ?
Maybe it's an English tailor who liked to skimp on the fabric for people's clothes .
Come on in , tailor .
You can heat your iron up in here .
Knock , knock !
Never a moment of peace !
Who are you ?
Ah , this place is too cold to be hell .
I won't pretend to be the devil's porter anymore .
I'm coming , I'm coming !
Please , don't forget to leave me a tip .
Did you go to bed so late , my friend , that you're having a hard time getting up now ?
What three things does drink make a man do ?
It sets you up for a fall .
It persuades you and discourages you .
I believe drink did all of this to you last night .
Is your master awake ?
Our knocking woke him up .
Here he comes .
Good morning , noble sir .
Good morning to both of you .
Is the king awake , worthy thane ?
Not yet .
He commanded me to wake him up early .
I've almost missed the time he requested .
I'll bring you to him .
I know the burden of hosting him is both an honor and a trouble , but that doesn't mean it's not a trouble just the same .
The work we enjoy is not really work .
This is the door .
I'll wake him , because that's my job .
Is the king leaving here today ?
He is .
He told us to arrange it .
The night has been chaotic .
The wind blew down through the chimneys where we were sleeping .
The owl made noise all night .
Some people say that the earth shook as if it had a fever .
It was a rough night .
I'm too young to remember anything like it .
Oh , horror , horror , horror !
This is beyond words and beyond belief !
What's the matter ?
The worst thing imaginable has happened .
The life" ?
Do you mean the king ?
Listen to this , King : as soon as we sent those Irish soldiers running for cover , the Norwegian king saw his chance to attack us with fresh troops and shiny weapons .
Didn't this frighten our captains , Macbeth and Banquo ?
The new challenge scared them about as much as sparrows frighten eagles , or rabbits frighten a lion .
To tell you the truth , they fought the new enemy with twice as much force as before ; they were like cannons loaded with double ammunition .
Your words , like your wounds , bring you honor .
Take him to the surgeons .
Who is this ?
He looks like someone with a strange tale to tell .
Go into the bedroom and see for yourself .
Don't ask me to talk about it .
Go look and then do the talking yourselves .
Wake up , wake up !
Ring the alarm bell .
Murder and treason !
Banquo and Donalbain , Malcolm !
Wake up !
Shake off sleep , which looks like death , and look at death itself !
Get up , get up , and look at this image of doomsday !
Malcolm !
Banquo !
Get up from your beds as if you were rising out of your own graves , and walk like ghosts to come witness this horror .
Speak up and tell me !
If I repeated it to you , it would kill you as soon as you heard it .
Oh Banquo , Banquo , the king has been murdered !
How horrible !
What , in our own house ?
Dear Macduff , I beg you , tell us you were lying and say it isn't so .
If I had only died an hour before this event I could say I had lived a blessed life .
Everything is a sick joke .
The graceful and renowned king is dead .
The wine of life has been poured out , and only the dregs remain .
What's wrong ?
You are , but you don't know it yet .
The source from which your royal blood comes has been stopped .
Your royal father is murdered .
Who did it ?
It seems that the guards who were supposed to be protecting his chamber did it .
Their hands and faces were all covered with blood .
So were their daggers , which we found on their pillows , unwiped .
They stared at us in confusion .
No one's life should have been entrusted to them .
And yet I still regret the anger that drove me to kill them .
What did you do that for ?
Is it possible to be wise , bewildered , calm , furious , loyal , and neutral all at once ?
Then right next to him I saw the murderers , dripping with blood , their daggers rudely covered in gore .
Who could have restrained himself , who loved Duncan and had the courage to act on it ?
Help me out of here , quickly !
Take care of the lady .
Right now we're shaken up by fears and doubts .
I'm putting myself in God's hands , and with his help I plan to fight against the secret plot that caused this treasonous murder .
So will I .
So will we all .
Let's get dressed quickly and then meet in the hall .
Agreed .
What are you going to do ?
Let's not stay here with them .
It's easy for a liar to pretend to feel sorrow when he actually feels none .
I'm going to England .
I'll go to Ireland .
We'll both be safer if we go separate ways .
Wherever we go , men will smile at us while hiding daggers .
Our closest relatives are the ones most likely to murder us .
We haven't yet encountered that danger , and the best thing to do is avoid it entirely .
There's good reason to escape when there's no mercy to be found anymore .
I can remember the past seventy years pretty well , and in all that time I have seen dreadful hours and strange things .
The clock says it's daytime , but dark night is strangling the sun .
They say the horses ate each other .
I saw it with my own eyes .
Here comes the good Macduff .
How are things going now ?
Can't you see for yourself ?
The servants Macbeth killed .
They were paid to betray their master .
Malcolm and Donalbain , the king's two sons , have run away and fled , which makes them the prime suspects .
Everything about this is unnatural !
Then it looks like Macbeth will become king .
He has already been named king and has left for Scone to be crowned .
Where is Duncan's body ?
It was carried to Colmekill to be placed in the tomb of his ancestors , where their bones are kept safe .
Are you going to Scone ?
No , cousin , I'm going to Fife .
Well , I'll go to Scone .
I hope things go well there .
Good-bye !
Farewell , old man .
May God's blessing go with you and with all who turn bad into good , and enemies into friends !
But it was also prophesied that the crown would not go to your descendants , and that my sons and grandsons would be kings instead .
If the witches tell the truth , which they did about you , maybe what they said about me will come true too .
But shhh !
I'll shut up now .
Whatever your highness commands me to do , it is always my duty to do it .
Are you going riding this afternoon ?
Yes , my good lord .
We would have liked to have heard your good advice , which has always been serious and helpful , at the council today , but we'll wait until tomorrow .
Are you riding far ?
I'm going far enough that I'll be riding from now until dinner .
Unless my horse goes faster than expected , I will be back an hour or two after sunset .
Don't miss our feast .
My lord , I won't miss it .
But we can talk more about that tomorrow , when we'll discuss matters of state that concern us both .
Hurry up and get to your horse .
Good-bye , until you return tonight .
Is Fleance going with you ?
Yes , my good lord .
It's time we hit the road .
Farewell .
Everybody may do as they please until seven o'clock tonight .
In order to make your company even more enjoyable , I'm going to keep to myself until suppertime .
Until then , God be with you !
Bring them to me .
I'm very afraid of Banquo .
He has the wisdom to act bravely but also safely .
I'm not afraid of anyone but him .
Then , like prophets , they named him the father to a line of kings .
Who's there !
God save the king !
Great happiness !
So now Sweno , the Norwegian king , wants a treaty .
We told him we wouldn't even let him bury his men until he retreated to Saint Colme's Inch and paid us ten thousand dollars .
Go announce that he will be executed , and tell Macbeth that Cawdor's titles will be given to him .
I'll get it done right away .
The thane of Cawdor has lost what the noble Macbeth has won .
Now go to the door and stay there until I call for you .
Wasn't it just yesterday that we spoke to each other ?
It was yesterday , your highness .
Well , did you think about what I said ?
I explained how you were deceived , how you were thwarted , the things that were used against you , who was working against you , and a lot of other things that would convince even a half-wit or a crazy person to say , "Banquo did it ! " You explained it all .
I did that and more , which brings me to the point of this second meeting .
Are you so patient and forgiving that you're going to let him off the hook ?
Are you so pious that you would pray for this man and his children , a man who has pushed you toward an early grave and put your family in poverty forever ?
We are men , my lord .
Just as hounds and greyhounds , mongrels , spaniels , mutts , shaggy lapdogs , swimming dogs , and wolf-dog crossbreeds are all dogs .
It's the same with men .
Now , if you occupy some place in the list of men that isn't down at the very bottom , tell me .
Because if that's the case , I will tell you a plan that will get rid of your enemy and bring you closer to me .
You both know Banquo was your enemy .
It's true , my lord .
We'll do what you want us to , my lord .
Though our lives , We have decided , my lord .
We're in .
I'll call for you soon .
Stay inside .
The deal is closed .
Banquo , if your soul is going to make it to heaven , tonight's the night .
Has Banquo left the court ?
Yes , madam , but he'll be back tonight .
Go tell the king I want to talk to him for a few minutes .
No problem , madam .
If you get what you want and you're still not happy , you've spent everything and gained nothing .
It's better to be the person who gets murdered than to be the killer and be tormented with anxiety .
What's going on , my lord ?
What's done is done .
We have slashed the snake but not killed it .
It will heal and be as good as new , and we'll be threatened by its fangs once again .
We killed those men and sent them to rest in peace so that we could gain our own peace .
After that , nothing can hurt him further , not weapons , poison , rebellion , invasion , or anything else .
Come on , relax , dear .
That's exactly what I'll do , my love , and I hope you'll do the same .
You have to stop talking like this .
You know that Banquo and his son Fleance are still alive .
That's comforting .
So be cheerful .
Before the bat flies through the castle , and before the dung beetle makes his little humming noise to tell us it's nighttime , a dreadful deed will be done .
What are you going to do ?
He who chooses me will get what many men want." What many men want , that "many" could mean that most people are fools and choose by whatever is flashy .
So I won't choose what many men desire , because I won't jump on the bandwagon and include myself with the whole crude population .
So I guess it's you , you silver treasure house .
Tell me once more what you say .
He who chooses me will get what he deserves." That's nicely put , because who's going to cheat luck and get more than he deserves ?
No one should have an honor he doesn't deserve .
Oh , wouldn't it be great if property , rank , official positions , and other honors were earned only by merit , not by corruption ?
How many people who are humble now would be great then ?
How many noblemen would be weeded out and would become peasants ?
Well , let me get back to my choice .
He who chooses me will get what he deserves." I'll assume I deserve the very best. , Give me a key for this one .
You thought about it too long , considering what you found there .
What's this ?
I'll read it. , It looks so unlike Portia !
The one who chooses me will get what he deserves" !
Didn't I deserve anything more than a fool's head ?
Is this my prize ?
Don't I deserve more than this ?
What does this say ?
This box was tested in the fire seven times .
Some people kiss shadows .
They only feel the shadow of joy .
This choice was as foolish as they are .
Take whatever wife you want to bed with you , You'll have a fool's head forever .
So go away .
I came here with a fool's head on my shoulders and now I'm leaving with two. , Goodbye , sweet lady .
I'll keep my oath and patiently suffer through my anger .
This is how the candle burned the moth .
Oh , these fools !
When they choose , they only know how to lose .
You know what they say .
Destiny chooses when you'll die and who you'll marry .
Come on , close the curtain , Nerissa .
Where's lady Portia ?
Here .
How can I help you , sir ?
I haven't seen such a promising candidate for your love .
Please don't tell me any more .
Come on , Nerissa , I want to go see this man who's come so courteously .
So , what's the news on the Rialto ?
But it's true , I don't want to get all mushy and go on and on , but the good Antonio , the honest Antonio , oh , if I only had a title good enough to match his ! , Come on , get to the point .
What are you saying ?
Well , the point is , he's lost a ship .
I hope that's all he loses .
Let me say "amen" quickly , before the devil comes in and stops my prayer , because here comes the devil , disguised as a Jew .
How's it going , Shylock ?
What's the news among the merchants ?
You knew , no one knew , no one knew as well as you did , about my daughter's plans to run away .
That's true .
I even knew the tailor who made the disguise she wore when she ran off .
She'll be damned for it .
That's true , if the devil's judging her .
My own flesh and blood turned against me !
A rebel !
No !
Your I mean my daughter is my flesh and blood .
But tell us , did you hear anything about Antonio's loss at sea ?
All right , we'll see you at dinnertime .
I must be one of these silent so-called wise men Gratiano's talking about , because he never lets me get a word in .
If you hang around me for two more years , you'll forget the sound of your own voice .
Goodbye .
Thank you .
Is he right ?
Gratiano talks more nonsense than any other man in Venice .
You promised to tell me .
That's another bad deal I've made ! , a bankrupt , a spendthrift , who now has to hide his head on the Rialto , a beggar who used to look so smug in front of the other merchants .
Let him think about his own debt .
He liked to call me a loan shark ; let him think about his debt to me .
He used to lend money as a favor between Christians ; but now , let him think about his own debt .
But you won't take his flesh if he can't pay .
What's that good for ?
I'll use it for fish bait .
He's laughed at my losses , made fun of my earnings , humiliated my race , thwarted my deals , turned my friends against me , riled up my enemies , and why ?
Because I'm a Jew .
Doesn't a Jew have eyes ?
Doesn't a Jew have hands , bodily organs , a human shape , five senses , feelings , and passions ?
Doesn't a Jew eat the same food , get hurt with the same weapons , get sick with the same diseases , get healed by the same medicine , and warm up in summer and cool off in winter just like a Christian ?
If you prick us with a pin , don't we bleed ?
If you tickle us , don't we laugh ?
If you poison us , don't we die ?
And if you treat us badly , won't we try to get revenge ?
If we're like you in everything else , we'll resemble you in that respect .
If a Jew offends a Christian , what's the Christian's kind and gentle reaction ?
Revenge .
We've been looking for him everywhere .
Here comes another Jew .
You couldn't find a third like these two unless the devil himself turned into a Jew .
Hello , Tubal .
Any news from Genoa ?
Did you find my daughter ?
I went to many places where I heard news about her , but I couldn't find her .
Oh , oh , oh !
I never felt it until now , two thousand ducats in that diamond , and other precious , precious jewels !
I wish my daughter were dead at my feet wearing those jewels !
I wish she were in her coffin here , with the ducats in her coffin !
You couldn't find out anything about them ?
Why ?
I don't even know how much I'm spending to find them .
Loss upon loss !
Well , other men have bad luck too .
Antonio , as I heard in Genoa , What , what , what ?
Bad luck , bad luck ?
He's had a ship wrecked coming from Tripolis .
Thank God , thank God !
Is it true , is it true ?
I spoke with some of the sailors who survived the wreck .
Thank you , Tubal .
Good news , good news !
Ha , ha , heard in Genoa .
I also heard that your daughter spent eighty ducats in Genoa one night .
Oh , you're sticking a dagger in me !
I'll never see my gold again .
Eighty ducats in one shot !
Eighty ducats !
I came to Venice with a number of Antonio's creditors who say he won't be able to avoid going bankrupt .
I'm very glad about that .
I'll hound him .
I'll torture him .
I'm very glad .
One creditor showed me a ring he got from your daughter in exchange for a monkey .
Damn her !
You're torturing me , Tubal .
That was my turquoise ring !
Leah gave it to me before we were married .
I wouldn't have given it away for a whole jungle of monkeys .
But Antonio's certainly ruined .
That's true , that's very true .
With him out of Venice , I can make whatever bargains I want when I lend money. , Go , Tubal .
Meet me at the synagogue .
Let me choose now .
I feel tortured by all this talking .
Tortured ,
They're as opposite as hot and cold .
Promise me you'll let me live , and I'll confess the truth .
All right then , confess and live .
Confess and love" is more like it .
But let me try my luck on the boxes .
Go ahead , then .
I'm locked in one of them .
If you really love me , you'll find me. , Nerissa and the rest of you , get away from him .
Play some music while he chooses .
Then if he loses , it'll be his swan song , music before the end .
What music should we play then ?
We've all come out to see what will happen. , Go , Hercules !
If you survive , I'll live .
I'm more anxious watching you fight than you are in the fight itself .
Ding , dong , bell .
How many people are cowards at heart but wear beards like Hercules or Mars , the god of war ?
Curly golden hair moves so nicely in the wind and makes a woman beautiful .
A lovely , cunning shore can distract a man from the perils of a stormy sea , just as a pretty scarf can hide a dangerous dark-skinned beauty .
So I'll have nothing to do with that gaudy gold box , it's like the gold that Midas couldn't eat .
Since this prize is yours , Be happy with it , and don't look for a new one .
If you're happy with what you've won And accept this prize as your blissful destiny , Then turn to where your lady is , And claim her with a loving kiss."
A nice message .
My lady , with your permission , this note authorizes me to give myself to you with a kiss .
And so , beautiful lady , I'm standing here just like that , wondering whether all this can be true until you tell me it is .
You see me standing here , Lord Bassanio .
Though I wouldn't wish to be better for my own sake , for your sake I wish I were twenty times more than myself , a thousand times more beautiful and ten thousand times richer , just so you might value me more , so my good qualities , beauty , possessions , and friends would be more than you could calculate .
I'm even happier that I'm not stupid , and I can learn .
I'm happiest of all that I'm yours now , my lord , my king , and you can guide me as you wish .
Everything I am and everything I have now belongs to you .
Just a minute ago I was the owner of this beautiful mansion , master of these servants , and queen over myself .
But as of right this second all these things are yours .
With this ring I give them all to you .
Please let me know your plan , Bassanio .
As long as it's honorable , you can be sure that I'll let you use all my money and do everything I can to help you .
Back when I was a schoolboy , if I lost an arrow I would try to find it by shooting another arrow in the same direction , watching the second arrow more carefully than I had the first .
By risking the second arrow , I'd often get both of them back .
I'm telling you this story for a reason .
I owe you a lot , and like a spoiled kid I've lost what I owe you .
But if you'd be willing to shoot another arrow the same way you shot the first , I'll watch your arrow more carefully this time .
Just tell me what to do , and I'll do it .
Tell me .
If you see me without it , you can be confident I'm dead .
Now we can shout , "Congratulations , congratulations , my lord and lady ! " My Lord Bassanio , and my dear lady , I wish you all the joy I can wish for .
And when you get married , I hope I can be married at the same time .
Absolutely , if you can find a wife by then .
I think I've found one already , thanks to you , my lord .
And do you mean what you're saying , Gratiano ?
Yes , my lord .
Hey , if I lay down my " Welcome , Lorenzo and Salerio .
I do too , my lord .
They're entirely welcome .
That's true , and with good reason .
This letter is for you from Signor Antonio .
Before I open this letter , please tell me how my good friend is doing .
He's not sick , my lord , but he's very upset , and his problems are serious .
His letter will tell you how he's doing .
I wish you'd won the Something bad in that letter is making Bassanio turn pale .
Some good friend of his must have died , because nothing else in the world could change a man so much .
What , does the news only get worse ? , Please , Bassanio , I'm half of you , so let me bear half the burden this letter brings you .
Oh Portia , these are some of the worst words that ever stained a piece of paper .
My darling , when I gave my love to you , I told you that all the wealth I had ran within my veins , that I have noble blood , but no money .
When I said that , I told you the truth .
But my dear , when I said I was worth nothing , I was actually bragging , I should've said that I was worse than nothing .
Have all his business ventures failed ?
Not even one success ?
Not one , my lord .
Anyway , even if he had the money now , the Jew probably wouldn't take it .
I've never seen a creature with a human shape who was so eager to destroy a man .
He's at the duke's morning and night , accusing the state of harming free trade if they deny him justice .
When I was still living with him I heard him swear to Tubal and Cush , his countrymen , that he'd rather have Antonio's flesh than twenty times the sum Antonio owed .
And I know that unless the law intervenes , it'll be bad news for poor Antonio .
Is this your good friend who's in so much trouble ?
How much does he owe the Jew ?
Three thousand ducats .
What , that's all ?
Pay him six thousand and cancel the debt .
I'll give you enough gold to pay back your debt twenty times over .
When it's paid , bring your friend back .
Until you get back , Nerissa and I will live like virgins and widows .
Put on a happy face , and welcome your friends .
But let me hear the letter from your friend .
Dear Bassanio , my ships have all been wrecked .
My creditors are getting mean .
My money's almost run out .
I couldn't pay my debt to the Jew on the due date .
In any case , do what you want .
If your affection for me doesn't convince you to come , don't let my letter do so." Oh , my darling , make your arrangements and go !
Since you're letting me leave , I'll hurry .
But I won't sleep till I get back .
Jailer , watch out for this one .
This is the fool who lent out money without charging interest .
Jailer , keep an eye on him .
Listen to me , good Shylock .
I'm going to get my Please , listen to me .
I want my bond .
I won't listen to you .
I want my bond , so stop talking .
I won't be taken for a fool who sighs and gives in to Christian meddlers .
Don't follow me .
I'm not talking with you .
I want my bond .
He's the most stubborn dog that ever lived among humans .
Leave him alone .
I won't follow him around with useless pleas anymore .
He wants me dead .
I know the real reason .
I've often given money to people who were unable to pay back their loans to him .
That's why he hates me .
I'm sure the duke will never allow this contract to be enforced .
So go .
I've lost so much weight worrying about my losses have that I'll hardly have a pound of flesh to spare for my bloody creditor tomorrow. , Well , jailer , let's go. , I hope to God that Bassanio comes to see me pay his debt .
Lorenzo , please take charge of the management of my house until my husband comes back .
Madam , with all my heart .
I'll do anything you ask .
They'll consider you and Jessica masters of this house in place of Lord Bassanio and myself .
So goodbye until we meet again .
Goodbye , Jessica .
Now , Balthazar , you've always been honest and faithful to me , and I trust you still are .
Sometimes the expression on her face tells me she likes me .
Her name is Portia .
I'll meet you at the ferry .
I'll go as fast as I can , madam .
Come on , Nerissa , I have many things to do that you don't even know about yet .
We'll see our husbands before they even have a chance to miss us .
Will they see us ?
They will , Nerissa , but we'll be disguised as men .
I'll tell twenty lies like that , so men will think I graduated from school at least a year ago .
I know a thousand immature tricks like that , and I'll use them all .
Why , are we turning to men ?
What kind of question is that !
Here , I'll tell you my whole plan in my carriage , which is waiting for us at the gate .
So hurry up , because we have twenty miles to cover today .
Yes , look , it's true that children are punished for the sins of their fathers .
That's why I'm worried about you .
I've always been straightforward with you , so now I'm telling you what I think .
Cheer up , because I think you're going to hell .
There's only one hope for you , and even that's a kind of illegitimate hope .
What hope is that , may I ask ?
You can hope your father isn't your real father .
That really is an illegitimate hope .
Then I'd be punished for the sins of my mother .
In that case I'm afraid you're damned by both your father and your mother .
When you avoid one trap , you fall into another .
You're in trouble either way .
My husband will save me .
He's made me a Christian .
He was wrong to do that .
There were enough Christians before , as many of them as could stand to live near each other .
All these new Christians will make the price of hogs go up .
If we're all pork-eaters , we won't be able to get our hands on a slice of bacon , even if we've got the money for it .
I'll tell my husband what you've said , Launcelot .
Here he comes .
You're going to make me jealous , Launcelot , if you keep taking my wife into dark corners like this !
No , you don't need to worry about us , Lorenzo .
Launcelot and I can't agree on anything .
He says I won't get into heaven because I'm a Jew's daughter , and he says you're irresponsible because by converting Jews to Christianity you're raising the price of pork .
I can justify that better than you can justify sleeping with Portia's African servant .
The It's too bad there's more of the Moor than there ought to be .
I think the best sign of intelligence will soon be silence , and talking will only be a good thing for parrots to do .
That's already been done , sir .
They're all ready to eat dinner .
Good Lord , what a clown you are !
Are you planning on showing me all your wit at once ?
About the table , sir , dinner will be served on it .
As for the food , it will be served in covered dishes .
As for your coming in to dinner , just do what you feel is right .
Oh , he's good at bending words around !
Anyway , how are you , Jessica ?
And how do you like Lord Bassanio's wife ?
I like her more than I can say .
And if he doesn't deserve this joy on earth , he'll never deserve it in heaven .
The poor rude world doesn't have her equal .
As good a wife as she is , that's how good a husband I am to you .
First let's go to dinner .
No , let me say some good things about you while I'm in the mood .
No , please , save it for dinner conversation .
Is Antonio here ?
Yes , sir , I'm here .
I feel sorry for you .
You've come to face a ruthless enemy , an inhuman wretch incapable of pity , without any feelings of mercy .
They tell me you've done everything you can to talk him out of what he's doing .
I'm ready to suffer peacefully whatever he does to me in his cruelty and anger .
One of you go call the Jew into court here .
He's standing ready outside the door .
Here he comes , my lord .
We all expect a nice answer from you , Jew .
I've told you what I intend to do , and I've sworn by the holy Sabbath to seek the penalty that is due according to our contract .
If you refuse to allow me to do so , your city's charter and its freedom are endangered .
You're going to ask me why I'd rather have a pound of decaying flesh than three thousand ducats .
I won't answer that .
Is that enough of an answer ?
What if I had a rat in my house , and I felt like paying ten thousand ducats to have it exterminated ?
Do you have your answer yet ?
Some men don't like roast pig , others go crazy if they see a cat , and others can't help urinating when they hear bagpipes .
So , to answer your question .
It doesn't excuse your cruel behavior .
I don't have to give you answers that you like .
Does everyone kill what they don't love ?
What , would you let a snake bite you twice ?
You might as well do the impossible rather than try to soften his Jewish heart .
I would choose to take my penalty .
How can you ever hope for mercy for yourself , when you don't give any now ?
Why should I be afraid of your judgment when I haven't done anything wrong ?
Many of you own slaves , which , like your donkeys and dogs and mules , you use to perform awful jobs just because you bought them .
Should I say to you , "Set them free !
Let them marry your children !
Why are you making them work so hard ?
Let their beds be as soft as yours , and let them eat the same food as you" ?
No , you'd answer , "The slaves are ours." And that's just how I'm answering you .
The pound of flesh that I want from him was very expensive .
It's mine and I'm going to get it .
If you refuse me , the laws of Venice have no validity .
I await justice .
Oh Nerissa , my poor little body is tired of this great big world .
But as far as I can tell , people with too much suffer as much as people with nothing .
The best way to be happy is to be in between .
Good point , and well said .
It would be better if you actually applied it to your life .
It takes a good priest to practice what he preaches .
But thinking like this won't help me choose a husband .
Isn't it a pain that I can't choose or refuse anyone , Nerissa ?
I have the authority to dismiss this court , unless Bellario comes today .
Bring us the letters .
Call the messenger in .
Cheer up , Antonio !
Keep up your courage , man !
I'll give the Jew my flesh , blood , bones , and everything before you lose one drop of blood for me .
I'm like the one sick sheep in the flock , the one who deserves to die .
The weakest fruit drops to the ground first , so let me drop .
Bassanio , the best thing you can do is to keep living and write an epitaph for my gravestone .
Have you come from Bellario's office in Padua ?
Yes , my lord .
Bellario sends his greetings .
To cut my penalty from that bankrupt man over there .
You're sharpening that knife not on your sole but on your soul , you cruel Jew .
No metal , not even the executioner's axe , could ever be half as sharp as your hatred .
Can't any prayers reach your heart ?
No , none that you're smart enough to make .
You make me want to agree with the philosopher Pythagoras that animal souls are reincarnated in human bodies .
That's why your desires are wolfish , bloody , and ravenous .
Unless your taunts can undo the signature on my contract , you're just wearing out your lungs by speaking so loud .
Be quiet , boy , or you'll lose your mind .
I stand here with the law on my side .
This letter from Bellario introduces us to a young and well-educated legal expert .
Where is he ?
He's waiting nearby to find out if you'll invite him in .
With all my heart. , Three or four of you go welcome him. , In the meantime , I'll read Bellario's letter out loud .
His name is Balthazar .
I leave him to you .
Did old Bellario send you here ?
Yes , my lord .
Welcome .
Please have a seat .
Are you familiar with the case currently before the court ?
Yes , thoroughly .
Antonio and Shylock , both of you come forward .
Is your name Shylock ?
Shylock is my name .
Your case is most unusual , though the Venetian law can't stop you from proceeding. , Yes , so he says .
Do you acknowledge the contract ?
Yes , I do .
Then the Jew must show you mercy .
Why do I have to do that ?
Tell me .
No one shows mercy because he has to .
It just happens , the way gentle rain drops on the ground .
It blesses the one who gives it and the one who receives it .
It's strongest in the strongest people .
It looks better in a king than his own crown looks on him .
Kingly power seems most like God's power when the king mixes mercy with justice .
If you pursue it , this strict court of Venice will need to carry out the sentence against the merchant there .
I take all responsibility for my decisions .
I want the law , the penalty , and the fulfillment of my contract .
Can't he pay back the money ?
If that's not enough , I'll sign a contract to pay ten times that much , and I'll give you my hands , my head , and my heart as security .
There's no power in Venice that can change an established decree .
The change will be recorded as a precedent , and many bad legal decisions will result .
That can't happen .
Please , let me review the contract .
Shylock , they're offering you three times the money you lent .
But I made an oath , an oath , an oath in heaven .
Should I perjure my soul by disobeying it ?
No , not for all of Venice .
And so the Jew may lawfully claim a pound of flesh nearest the merchant's heart , to be cut off by him. , But please have mercy .
Take three times your money .
Tell me to tear up this contract .
I'll tear it up when it's paid .
You seem like a good judge .
You know the law .
I urge you to deliver your verdict .
I swear that nothing anyone can say will change my mind .
I'm sticking to the contract .
I beg the court to deliver the verdict .
Well , then , here it is : you must prepare yourself for his knife .
Oh , good judge !
Oh , you excellent young man !
The law fully authorizes the penalty , which you have to pay according to the contract .
Very true .
Oh wise judge !
You're so much older than you look !
Yes , his chest !
Nearest his heart." , Those are the very words .
Yes .
Is there a scale here to weigh the flesh ?
I have it ready .
Pay a surgeon to stand by and bind his wounds , Shylock , so he doesn't bleed to death .
Is that called for in the contract ?
Not explicitly , but so what ?
It wouldn't hurt you to be charitable .
I can't find it .
It's not in the contract .
Not much .
I'm ready and waiting. , Give me your hand , Bassanio .
Goodbye .
Don't be sad that this happened because of you , because Lady Luck's been nicer to me than usual .
Be sad only at the fact that you'll lose your friend , your friend doesn't regret that he paid your debt .
If the Jew cuts deep enough , I'll pay it instantly with all my heart .
Antonio , I married a woman as dear to me as life itself .
But life itself , my wife , and the whole world aren't more valuable to me than your life is .
I'd give it all up , yes , I'd sacrifice them all to this devil here , to save you .
Your wife wouldn't like it if she were here to hear you make that offer .
I have a wife I love .
I wish she were in heaven so she could appeal to some power to make this dog Jew change his mind .
It's nice you're offering to sacrifice her behind her back .
That's what you get for marrying Christian husbands .
I have a daughter .
The court awards it and the law authorizes it .
What a righteous judge !
And you have to cut this flesh from his chest .
The law allows it , and the court awards it .
What a wise judge !
Come on , get ready .
But wait a moment .
There's something else .
This contract doesn't give you any blood at all .
The words expressly specify "a pound of flesh." So take your penalty of a pound of flesh , but if you shed one drop of Christian blood when you cut it , the state of Venice will confiscate your land and property under Venetian law .
Is that the law ?
You can see for yourself .
You asked for justice , so rest assured you'll get more justice than you bargained for .
Pay me three times the amount of the loan and let the Christian go .
Here is the money .
Wait !
The Jew will have justice .
Wait , don't rush !
He's not getting anything except the penalty .
So get ready to cut off the flesh .
Don't shed any blood , or cut less or more than exactly a pound of flesh .
If you take more or less than exactly a pound , even if it's just the tiniest fraction of an ounce , if the scale changes by even so much as a hair , you die , and all your property will be confiscated .
A second Daniel ! , A Daniel , Jew !
I've got you now , pagan .
Why is the Jew waiting ?
Take your penalty .
Give me my money and let me go .
I have it ready for you .
Here it is .
Your father was an extremely moral man , and religious people get odd ideas on their deathbeds .
But tell me .
Well , first there was the prince from Naples .
I'm afraid his mother may have had an affair with a blacksmith .
Then there's the Count Palatine .
He does nothing but frown , as if he wants to say , "If you don't want me , I don't care." He doesn't even smile when he hears funny stories .
If he's so sad and solemn when he's young , I can only imagine how much he'll cry as an old man .
No , I'd rather be married to a skull with a bone in its mouth than to either of those men .
God protect me from these two !
What did you think about that French lord , Monsieur le Bon ?
No , he refused it publicly , in open court .
He will have only justice and his penalty .
You can't have anything but the penalty , to be taken at your peril , Jew .
Well , then , I hope he chokes on it !
I'm not staying here to argue anymore .
Wait a minute , Jew .
The law has another hold on you .
The laws of Venice state that if a foreign resident directly or indirectly attempts to kill any citizen , the person he tried to kill will receive one half of the foreigner's goods .
The other half goes to the state .
So get down on your knees and beg mercy from the duke .
So you'll be hanged at the state's expense .
I want you to see the difference between us , so I pardon you even before you ask for a pardon .
Half of your wealth goes to Antonio .
The other half goes to the state .
Yes , the state's half can be reduced , but not Antonio's .
No , go ahead and take my life .
Don't pardon that .
You take my house away when you take the money I need for upkeep .
You take my life when you take away my means of making a living .
What mercy can you show him , Antonio ?
Nothing else , for God's sake !
If the duke and his court agree to set aside the fine for one half of his property , I'm happy , as long as he lets me have the other half in trust , to give it to the gentleman who recently stole his daughter .
Second , he must make a will here in this court that leaves all his property to his son-in-law Lorenzo and his daughter when he dies .
He must do this , or I'll recant the pardon I just delivered .
Are you satisfied , Jew ?
What do you say ?
I'm satisfied .
Please let me go .
I'm not well .
Send the deed after me and I'll sign it .
Go , but sign the deed .
I should really leave right away .
I'm sorry you don't have time. , Antonio , give this gentleman a reward .
We owe you love and service forever .
Being satisfied with a job well done is payment enough .
In saving you I consider myself well paid .
My thoughts were never on money .
I hope you'll recognize me when we meet again .
I wish you well .
Take some memento from us as a token of our gratitude , not as a fee .
This ring , sir , oh no , it's nothing .
I'd be ashamed to give you this .
I don't want anything but that .
Now that I think about it , I really want it .
There's more to this ring than its cash value .
I'll give you the most expensive ring in Venice , and I'll make a public announcement to help me find it .
But as for this ring , please excuse me .
I see you like to make big offers , sir .
First you taught me how to beg , and now I think you're teaching me how a beggar should be answered .
Good sir , this ring was given to me by my wife .
When she put it on my finger , she made me swear never to sell it , give it away , or lose it .
Many men use that excuse to avoid giving gifts .
If your wife's not a madwoman , and you tell her how much I deserve this ring , she won't stay angry at you forever if you give it to me .
Well , anyway , goodbye .
Bassanio , let him have the ring .
Come on , you and I will go soon .
Early in the morning we'll both rush to Belmont .
Come on , Antonio .
Find out where the Jew's house is .
Give him this deed and have him sign it .
We'll leave tonight and be home a day before our husbands get back .
Lorenzo will be happy with what we've done .
And could you please take my servant to old Shylock's house ?
I'll do that .
Go , hurry .
You know where I'll be waiting .
The moon's bright tonight .
I think that on a night like this , when the wind blew the trees so gently that they didn't make a sound , On a night like this , On a night like this , On a night like this ,
On a night like this , young Lorenzo swore he loved her very much , stealing her heart with vows of love , but not one vow was true .
On a night like this , pretty Jessica , in a bad mood , said outrageously wrong things about her lover , and he forgave her .
I hear his footsteps .
Who are you , coming so fast in this quiet night ?
A friend .
A friend ?
What friend ?
What's your name , please , friend ?
My name's Stephano , and I've come to tell you my mistress will arrive here at Belmont before sunrise .
She's still at the monastery , kneeling and praying for a happy marriage .
Who's coming with her ?
No one except her maid and a holy hermit .
Has my master returned yet ?
Hey , hey !
Hey !
Yoo-hoo !
Who's shouting ?
Hey !
Have you seen Master Lorenzo !
Stop hollering , man !
I'm here .
Hey !
Where , where ?
Here .
Tell him a messenger has arrived from my master with good news .
My master will be here in the morning .
My dear , let's go inside and wait for them to arrive .
But I guess it doesn't matter .
We might as well call him a man , since God created him .
His horse is better than the Neapolitan's and he frowns more than the Count Palatine .
What about Falconbridge , that young English baron ?
I have no opinion about him .
He doesn't speak Latin , French , or Italian , and you know how little English I speak .
He's great-looking , but how can you talk to someone who doesn't speak your language ?
He was dressed so oddly too !
I think he got his jacket in Italy , his tights in France , his hat in Germany , and his behavior everywhere .
What do you think of his neighbor , the Scottish lord ?
How beautiful the moonlight's shining on this bank !
Let's sit here and let the music fill our ears .
Stillness and nighttime are perfect for beautiful music .
Sit down , Jessica .
Look at the stars , see how the floor of heaven is inlaid with small disks of bright gold .
Wake up the moon goddess with a hymn !
Get her attention and draw her home with music .
I'm never in the mood to laugh when I hear sweet music .
His soul is as dull as night and dark as the underworld .
Nobody like that should be trusted .
Pay attention to the music .
That light we see is coming from my hall .
Look how far that little candle sends its light !
That's the way a good deed shines in a naughty world .
While the moon was shining we didn't even notice the candle .
Well , brighter lights always dim the smaller ones .
A governor shines as brightly as a king until a king is near by , and the governor suddenly looks like a nobody .
Music , listen !
It's your music , madam , from your house .
Now I see that you can't call anything good except in right context .
How many things in life seem good to us because of when they happen !
Quiet now !
Look how the moon seems to be sleeping with its lover and can't be awoken !
If I'm not mistaken , that's Portia's voice .
He recognizes me like a blind man recognizes a cuckoo , by its bad voice .
Dear lady , welcome home .
We've been praying for our husbands ' welfare .
Have they come back ?
Go inside , Nerissa .
Tell my servants not to mention that we were gone .
I hear his trumpet .
I think this night is just like sick daylight .
It only looks a little paler .
It looks like a day when the sun is hidden .
I'll give Thank you , darling .
I'd like to introduce you to my friend .
This is Antonio , my dearest friend .
Sir , welcome to our house .
But action speaks louder than words , so I'll cut short these polite words .
What , an argument already ?
What's the matter ?
It said , "Love me and don't leave me." How can you talk about the quality of the poem or the value of the ring ?
You swore to me when I gave it to you that you would wear it till you died , and that it would be buried with you .
And now you claim you gave it to a judge's clerk !
He will if he lives long enough to become a man .
Yes , if a woman grows up to be a man .
I didn't have the heart to say no to him .
You were wrong to give away your wife's first gift so thoughtlessly , a thing you swore to keep on your finger and bound faithfully to your body .
I gave my lover a ring and made him swear never to lose it or give it away .
And here he is .
I'd swear he wouldn't leave it behind , or even take it off his finger , for all the money in the world .
To tell the truth , Gratiano , you're giving your wife a valid reason to get upset .
If it were me , I'd be very upset too .
Bassanio gave his ring to the judge who asked for it , and deserved it too .
And then his clerk , who went to a lot of trouble with the writing , begged for mine .
Neither of them would take anything but the two rings .
Which ring did you give away , my lord ?
Not the one I gave you , I hope .
If I could make things better by lying , I'd deny it .
But you see my finger doesn't have the ring on it .
It's gone .
My dear Portia , if you knew who I gave the ring to , for whose sake I gave the ring to him , why I gave it to him , and how unwilling I was to leave it when he wouldn't accept anything but the ring , you wouldn't be so angry .
If you'd known how much that ring meant , how much the woman who gave it to you is worth , or how much your honor depended on your keeping the ring , you wouldn't have let it go .
Nerissa's got the right idea .
I'll bet my life you gave some woman the ring !
What could I say , my dear ?
I had to send it to him .
Don't let that lawyer ever come near my house !
Since he has the jewel I loved , which you swore you'd keep forever , I'll be as generous as you were to him .
I won't deny him anything of mine , including my own body and my husband's bed .
I'll recognize him all right , I'm sure of it .
So don't spend one night away from this house .
Watch me like a hawk .
If you don't , if I'm left alone , I swear I'll have that legal expert as my bedfellow .
All these quarrels are about me .
Don't be upset .
All these friends are my witnesses , so I swear to you , I swear by your beautiful eyes , in which I see myself reflected , Did you hear that !
He sees himself in my two eyes , so there's two of him .
He should swear by his two-faced self , and that's an oath I'll believe !
No , just listen to me .
If you forgive my mistake , I swear I'll never break an oath with you again .
I lent my body once to make him rich .
My God , it's the same one I gave the judge !
I got it from him .
What , did you cheat on us before we deserved it ?
Don't be crass. , You all look confused .
I'm speechless .
Yes , but the clerk will never do it , unless he grows up to be a man .
Madam , you've given me life and given me a living too .
How did you like the young German , the duke of Saxony's nephew ?
He's pretty awful in the morning when he's sobering up , and even worse in the afternoon when he's drunk .
At his best he's a little less than a man , and at his worst he's little more than an animal .
I'll do anything rather than marry a drunk , Nerissa .
You don't have to worry about any of these lords , my lady .
I wish them all safe trips home .
Do you remember a Venetian scholar and soldier who accompanied the marquess of Montferrat here once when your father was still alive ?
How are you , Lorenzo ?
My clerk has some comforting news for you , too .
Yes , and I'll give it to him for free .
Ladies , you're dropping bread from the heavens to starving people .
It's almost morning , but I'm sure you're not fully satisfied about what happened .
Let's go inside and we'll answer all your questions truthfully .
All right , then .
My first question for Nerissa is whether she'd rather wait till tomorrow night or go to bed now , since there are only two more hours till morning .
When the day comes , I'll wish it were nighttime , so I could sleep with the legal expert's clerk .
Yes , madam , that's the one .
He deserves a beautiful wife more than all the other men I've ever seen .
I remember him well , and my memory tells me that he deserves your praise .
Hello , do you have any news ?
The four suitors are looking for you so they can say goodbye , madam .
And there's a messenger representing a fifth one , the prince of Morocco , who says the prince will be here tonight .
If I could say hello to the fifth one as happily as I'll say goodbye to the first four , I'd be very happy he's coming .
If he's as good as a saint but is black like a devil , I'd rather he hear my confession than marry me .
Let's go , Nerissa. ,
Three thousand ducats , hmmm .
Yes , for three months .
For three months , hmmm .
As I said before , Antonio will guarantee the loan .
If I default , he'll pay you .
Antonio will guarantee it , hmmm .
Can you help me ?
What's your answer ?
Three thousand ducats for three months , and Antonio will guarantee it .
Your answer ?
Antonio's a good man .
Have you heard anything to the contrary ?
But his investments are uncertain right now .
He has one ship bound for Tripoli , another heading for the Indies .
What's more , people at the
But ships are just fragile boards , and sailors are just men .
There are rats and thieves and pirates , not to mention storms , winds , and rocks .
But in spite of all this , the man is still wealthy enough .
I assure you he can .
Oh yes , to smell This is Signor Antonio .
To be honest , I don't know why I'm so sad .
I'm tired of it , and you say you're tired of it too .
I'd be peering over maps to figure out the best ports , piers , and waterways .
Everything that made me worry about my ships would make me sad .
Shylock , are you listening ?
If I remember correctly , I can't raise the entire three thousand ducats immediately .
But so what ?
Tubal , a wealthy Jew I know , will supply me with the cash .
But wait a minute !
How many months do you want ?
Shylock , although I never lend or borrow with interest , I'm willing to break that habit to help a friend in need .
Oh yes , three thousand ducats .
For three months .
Yes , I forgot , three months .
That's right .
That's not how I do business .
When Jacob took care of his uncle Laban's sheep , Jacob was the heir to his grandfather Abraham's birthright , because his mother cleverly arranged for her husband Isaac to make Jacob his heir , What's your point ?
Did he charge interest ?
Jacob didn't have any control over what happened .
That your interest payments are like Jacob's sheep ?
But listen to me , signor ,
An evil soul using a holy story is like a criminal who smiles at you .
Oh , liars can look so honest !
Three months from twelve months of the year .
Let me see .
The interest rate will be , Well , Shylock ?
Signor Antonio , you've often insulted my money and my business practices in the Rialto .
And all because I use my own money to make a profit .
And now it looks like you need my help .
All right then .
You come to me saying , "Shylock , we need money." You say that ! , even though you spat on my beard and kicked me like you'd kick a stray mutt out your front door .
And now you're asking for money .
What can I tell you ?
Shouldn't I say , "Does a dog have money ?
Is it possible for a mutt to lend three thousand ducats ? " Or should I bend down low , and in a humble and submissive voice say :
If you're going to lend us this money , don't lend it to us as if we were your friends .
Instead , lend it to me as your enemy .
Look at you getting all riled up !
I want to be friends with you , and forget all the times you've embarrassed and humiliated me .
I'm making a kind offer , zero percent financing .
That really would be kind .
I'll show you how kind I am .
If you don't repay me on the day we agree on , in the place we name , for the sum of money fixed in our contract , your penalty will be a pound of your pretty flesh , to be cut off and taken out of whatever part of your body I like .
It's a deal .
I'll agree to those terms and even say that Jews are nice .
No , you can't sign a contract like that for me !
I'd rather go without the money .
In two months , a month before this loan is due , I expect to earn more than three times that much from my investments .
A pound of human flesh taken isn't even as valuable as a pound of mutton or beef .
If he agrees , great .
If not , goodbye .
And I hope you won't think badly of me .
Yes , Shylock , I'll sign the contract and agree to its terms .
Then meet me right away at the notary's .
Give him the instructions for our amusing little contract , and I'll go get the money for you right away .
Hurry up , my Jewish friend .
My ships will come home a month before the money is due .
I wouldn't change it except to make you think of me , my darling queen .
Thank you for saying that .
Show me the caskets and let me try my luck .
I swear by my sword , which killed the Shah of Persia and a Persian prince and defeated the Sultan Suleiman three times , that I would face the meanest-looking warriors on earth .
But this is bad !
Think about it carefully .
Let me take my chances .
Let's go to the temple first .
You can take your chances after dinner .
I'm sure I'll feel guilty if I run away from this Jew , my master .
Be tough , " says the devil , "and run ! " But then my conscience , hanging around my heart , says very wisely to me , "My good friend Launcelot , you're a good boy , the son of an honest man , " really , that should be the son of an honest woman , since my father cheated on my mother .
Anyway , my conscience says , "Stay put." "Go , " the devil says .
Don't go , " says my conscience .
Conscience , " I say , "you give good advice." "Devil , " I say , "you give good advice." If I listened to my conscience , I'd stay with the Jew my master , who's a devil .
But if I ran away from the Jew , I'd be following the advice of the devil , who's the very devil himself .
The devil's advice is nicer .
I'll run , devil .
Tell me to run , and I'll run .
Excuse me , young man , how do I get to the Jew's residence ?
Young man , excuse me , how do I get to the Jew's ?
Turn right at the next turn , but at the following turn , turn left .
Oh , and then at the very next turn , don't turn left or right , but turn down and around to the Jew's house .
Good heavens , those are difficult directions .
Can you tell me if a man named Launcelot , who lives with him , is still there ?
Are you talking about young Master Launcelot ?
He's not a "master , " sir , he's just a poor man's son .
His father , if I do say so myself , is an honest but very poor man , and , thank God , likely to live a long time .
He's just Launcelot .
Who wouldn't get sad thinking about things like that ?
It's obvious .
No , that's not it , trust me .
So it's not my business that's making me sad .
Well then , you must be in love .
You're not in love either ?
But excuse me , Yes , I'm talking about Launcelot , sir .
Oh , no .
God forbid !
The boy was going to support me in my old age !
What am I , a cane ?
Don't you recognize me , father ?
Heaven help me , I don't know you , sir .
But please tell me , is my boy , God rest his soul , alive or dead ?
You really don't recognize me , father ?
Sir , I'm half-blind .
I don't know you .
Even if you had your eyes , you still might not recognize me .
It takes a wise father to know his own child .
Well , old man , I'll tell you news of your son .
Give me your blessing .
Please stand up !
I'm sure you aren't Launcelot , my boy .
Give me your blessing .
I'm Launcelot , who was your boy , is your son , and will be your child .
I can't believe you're my son .
Yes , you're right , her name is Margery .
If you're Launcelot , then you're my own flesh and blood .
Then Dobbin's tail must be growing backward .
I'm sure he had more hair on his tail than I have on my face when I last saw him .
Lord , how you've changed !
How are you and your master getting along ?
I've brought him a present .
How are you ?
My master's a total Jew .
You're giving him a present ?
Give him a noose to hang himself .
He's starving me to death .
You can see my ribs so well you can count them .
I'm glad you've come , father .
Give me your present to give to Master Bassanio .
Thank you .
What do you want with me ?
What do you want ?
To work for you , sir .
That's what we're trying to say , sir .
I know who you are .
You can have what you want .
Father , go ahead .
BASSANIO Please , Leonardo , think about this I'll do my best .
He's walking over there , sir .
Signor Bassanio !
Gratiano !
I have a favor to ask .
Anything .
Don't say no .
Let me go with you to Belmont .
Well , if you have to go , you have to go .
But listen to me , Gratiano .
Sometimes you get a bit too wild , and you let your voice get a bit loud and rude .
Please , try to act a little more serious , or the people in Belmont will get the wrong impression about me , and your wildness will make me blow my chance with Portia .
Listen , Signor Bassanio , there's nothing to worry about .
I'll carry prayer books in my pocket and look sweet , even more .
If I don't do all this , never trust me again .
Well , we'll see how you act .
Okay , but tonight doesn't count .
You can't judge me based on what I do tonight .
I'd rather see you having fun , because we have friends coming who want to have fun .
Anyway , I have to say goodbye to you now .
I've got some business to take care of .
I'm sorry you're leaving my father like this .
It's hell in our house , and you helped cheer it up , like a funny devil .
You'll soon be meeting Lorenzo at supper ; he'll be a guest of your new master .
Give him this letter .
Goodbye .
I'm sure some Christian will resort to trickery to get you .
But goodbye .
It's not manly to cry .
Goodbye .
Goodbye , Launcelot .
Oh God , what a heinous sinner I am , being ashamed to be my father's child !
But I need to remember I'm related to him by blood , not behavior .
Oh Lorenzo , if you keep your promise to me , I'll end this agony by becoming a Christian and marrying you .
No , we'll sneak away at supper time , disguise ourselves with masks at my house , and come back in an hour .
But we haven't made any preparations .
We haven't even talked about who'll be our torchbearers .
I think it's better to call it off .
It's only four o'clock now .
We have two hours to get ready .
Launcelot , what's going on ?
I recognize the handwriting .
I bet it's a love letter !
Where are you going ?
To invite my former boss , the Jew , to dine tonight with my new master , the Christian .
Me too .
Meet me and Gratiano at his house in about an hour .
It's good we're doing this .
Wasn't that letter from Jessica ?
Some people will laugh at anything , and others are so grouchy they won't even crack a smile when they hear something hysterically funny .
Goodbye , then .
You're both very precious to me .
You need to leave to take care of your own business .
We're available .
Bassanio , we'll say goodbye for now , since you've found Antonio .
Don't worry , I'll be there .
I have to tell you everything .
Who asked you to call her ?
I'm not asking you to call her .
You always loved to tell me I couldn't do anything without being told .
Did you call me ?
Do you need something ?
I've been invited to supper , Jessica .
Here are my keys. , But why should I go ?
I wasn't invited because they like me .
They're just flattering me .
But I'll go out of spite , to feed off the wasteful Christian. , Jessica , my girl , watch the house .
I don't feel like going .
I know because I dreamed of money bags last night .
Please go , sir .
My new master is expecting your approach .
And I'm expecting his reproach .
And they've been plotting things together .
I knew there would be a masquerade when I got that bad omen of a bloody nose last Easter Monday , at six in the morning , four years after I got the same kind of bloody nose on Ash Wednesday , in the afternoon .
What , there's going to be a masquerade ?
Don't stick your head out into the public street to stare at the Christian fools with painted faces .
Block up my house's ears , I mean the windows .
I'll go ahead of you , sir .
What did that gentile fool say to you , hmmm ?
He said "Goodbye , madam , " and nothing else .
The fool's nice enough , but he's such a huge eater , and slow as a snail when he works .
He sleeps all day like a cat .
Anyway , Jessica , go inside .
I might come back soon .
Do as I told you .
Shut the doors after you .
Goodbye .
If luck's with me , I'll lose a father , and you'll lose a daughter .
This is the roof under which Lorenzo said to meet him .
He's late .
Yes , and that's surprising , because lovers are usually early .
Yes , for new lovers time passes ten times faster than for couples who've been married forever .
That's always true .
Who gets up from a meal with the same appetite he had when he sat down ?
Can any horse retrace his footsteps with the same energy he had when he walked them the first time ?
We chase everything in life more excitedly than we actually enjoy it when we get it .
Here comes Lorenzo .
We'll talk about this later .
My dear friends , thanks for your patience .
I had business that made me late .
When you have to steal your own wives some day , I'll wait for you just as long .
Come over here .
Who's in there ?
Who are you ?
Tell me so I can be sure , though I swear I recognize your voice .
I'm Lorenzo , your love .
Lorenzo , that's for sure , and I'm also sure you're my love , who else do I love so much ?
And now who but you knows whether I'm yours ?
As God is my witness , you know you're mine .
Here , catch this box .
It'll be worth your while .
You have to be my torchbearer for the masquerade .
What , I have to hold a candle up so people can see what I'm doing ?
I'll lock up the doors , grab some more ducats , and be with you right away .
My God , she can't be a Jew , she's too nice !
God , I'm crazy about her .
She's wise , if I'm judging her right .
She's beautiful , if my eyes can see .
And she's loyal , as she has proven .
And as long as she's herself , wise , beautiful , and faithful , she'll always have a place in my heart .
Ah , you're here ? , Come on , gentlemen , let's go !
Our masquerade mates are waiting for us .
Who's there ?
Signor Antonio ?
It's nine o'clock !
Our friends are all waiting for you .
There's no masquerade tonight .
I've sent twenty people to look for you .
I'm glad .
I want to head out tonight .
One of them contains my picture .
If you choose that one , I'm yours , along with the picture .
I wish some god could help me choose !
Let me see .
I'll look over the inscriptions again .
What does the lead box say ?
He who chooses me must give and risk all he has." Must give everything , for what ?
For lead ?
Risk everything for lead ?
This box is too threatening .
Men who risk everything hope to make profits .
A golden mind doesn't bend down to choose something worthless .
So I won't give or risk anything for lead .
What does the silver one say ?
He who chooses me will get as much as he deserves." As much as he deserves , wait a minute there , Morocco , and consider your own value with a level head .
What if I went no further and chose this one ?
But let's see once more what the gold one says : "He who chooses me will get what many men want." That's Portia !
The whole world wants her .
They come from the four corners of the earth to kiss this shrine and see this living , breathing saint .
Princes travel across deserts and the vast wilderness of Arabia to come see the beautiful Portia .
The wide ocean doesn't prevent them from coming to see her , they travel across it as if it were a little stream .
One of these three boxes contains her lovely picture .
Could the lead one contain it ?
No , it'd be a sin to think such a low thought .
Lead's too crass to hold her .
Is she enclosed in silver , which is ten times less valuable than gold ?
Oh , what a sinful thought !
Nobody ever set a gem like her in a worse setting than gold .
They have a coin in England stamped with the figure of an angel , but that's just engraved on the surface .
You don't look well , Antonio .
People with too much invested in the world always get hurt .
I'd rather overload my liver with wine than starve my heart by denying myself fun .
I'll talk to you more about this some other time .
I'm a fool. , Let's go , Lorenzo. , Goodbye for now .
I'll finish my lecture after dinner .
Here an angel's lying in a golden bed. , Give me the key .
I will choose this one and try my chances .
Damn it !
What's this ?
It's a skull with a scroll in its empty eye socket .
I'll read it aloud .
All that glitters is not gold , You've often heard that said .
Many men have sold their souls Just to view my shiny surface .
But gilded tombs contain worms .
If you'd been as wise as you were bold , With an old man's mature judgment , You wouldn't have had to read this scroll .
Portia , goodbye to you .
My heart's too sad for long goodbyes .
Losers always leave quickly .
Good riddance ! , Close the curtains and leave. , I hope everyone who looks like him will make the same choice .
I saw Bassanio sail away , and Gratiano went with him .
I'm sure Lorenzo isn't on their ship .
That wicked Jew got the duke to listen to his complaints .
The duke went with him to search Bassanio's ship .
He got there too late .
The ship was already sailing .
But once he got there , the duke learned that Lorenzo and his lover Jessica were together in a gondola .
In any case , Antonio assured the duke they weren't with Bassanio on his ship .
I've never heard such confused emotions as what that Jew dog was shouting in the streets .
Ran off with a Christian !
Oh my Christian ducats !
Justice , find the girl !
She has the stones on her , and the ducats." I know , all the boys in Venice are following him , yelling , "His stones , his daughter , and his ducats ! "
I hope Antonio repays his loan on time , or he'll suffer for this .
That's a good point .
I spoke with a Frenchman yesterday who said that a Venetian ship loaded with treasure was wrecked in the English Channel .
You should tell Antonio what you hear , but don't do it suddenly , because it might upset him .
I saw Bassanio and Antonio say goodbye .
Bassanio told him he'd try to hurry back .
As for the Jew's contract , don't let it be a factor in your plans .
Then he shook Bassanio's hand affectionately , and they separated .
I think he only loves life because of Bassanio .
Let's go find him and cheer him up .
Yes , let's do that .
Hurry , hurry , close the curtain quick .
The prince of Arragon has taken his oath , and he's coming to make his choice now .
Look , here are the boxes , prince .
If you choose the one that contains my picture , we'll be married right away .
But if you fail , you have to leave immediately .
Everyone who comes to gamble on winning me has to swear to these three rules .
Okay , I'm ready .
I hope luck will give me what my heart hopes for !
Gold , silver , and common lead .
He who chooses me must give and risk all he has." You'd have to be more attractive for me to give or risk anything for you .
What does the golden box say ?
Hmm , let me see :
We seemed to have two separate bodies , but we had one heart .
Do you want to destroy our old friendship by joining these men to insult your poor friend ?
It's not friendly , and it's not ladylike .
All women would be angry with you for doing it , even though I'm the only one who's hurt by it .
I'm not insulting you .
It sounds more like you're insulting me .
Didn't you send Lysander , as an insult , to follow me around praising my eyes and my face ?
Haven't you made your other love , Demetrius , who kicked me with his foot not long ago , call me a goddess and a divine , rare , precious , heavenly creature ?
Why does he talk like that to a girl he can't stand ?
And why does Lysander deny that he loves you , when he loves you so deeply ?
Why does it matter that I'm not as lucky or lovable as you are and that the love I feel is unrequited ?
You should pity me for that reason , not hate me .
I don't know what you're talking about .
Oh , fine .
All right , go ahead , keep up your little game , pretend to be sympathetic , but then nudge each other and wink and make faces at me when I turn my back .
If you had any sense of pity , or manners , you wouldn't pretend to fight over me like this .
But goodbye .
It's partly my own fault , since I followed you here .
Stay , lovely Helena .
Listen to my excuse .
My love , my life , my soul , beautiful Helena !
That's a good one .
You can't force me any more than Hermia can beg me .
Your threats are no stronger than her whining. , Helena , I love you .
I swear I do .
I'll give my life for you , just to prove this guy wrong when he says I don't love you .
I say that I love you more than he does .
If that's what you say , go fight a duel with me and prove it .
Lysander , where are you going with all this ?
Why have you gotten so rude ?
Your darling ?
Get out , you dark-skinned gypsy !
Get out , you horrible poison .
Get out !
Are you joking ?
Of course he is , and so are you .
Demetrius , I'm ready to fight you as promised .
I wish we had a signed legal contract .
I don't trust you .
Sure , I hate her , but I wouldn't hurt her .
I certainly did , and I never wanted to see you again .
So stop hoping and wondering what I mean .
I've spelled it out for you clearly .
Oh , no !
Oh , that's very nice !
You ought to be ashamed of yourself !
Puppet" ?
Why "puppet" ? , Oh , I see where this is going .
So how short am I , you painted barber pole ?
Tell me .
How short am I ?
Good Hermia , please don't act so bitter toward me .
He followed you .
And I followed him because I loved him .
But he told me to get lost and threatened to hit me , kick me , even kill me .
Please let me go .
You see how naive and foolish I've been .
Well , get out of here then !
What's keeping you ?
My stupid heart , which I'm leaving behind here .
What , you're leaving it with Lysander ?
No , with Demetrius .
Don't be afraid .
She can't hurt you , Helena .
She was a hellcat in school .
And she's fierce , even though she's little .
Little" again ?
Nothing but "little" and "short" ! , Why are you letting her insult me like this ?
Let me at her ! .
How are you , my love ? , Demetrius and Egeus , come with us .
I want you to do some things for our wedding , and I also want to discuss something that concerns you both .
We're following you not only because it is our duty , but also because we want to .
What's going on , my love ?
Why are you so pale ?
Why have your rosy cheeks faded so quickly ?
Probably because my cheeks ' roses needed rain , which I could easily give them with all the tears in my eyes .
Oh , honey !
Listen , in books they say that true love always faces obstacles .
Either the lovers have different social standings ,
Leave Hermia alone .
Don't talk about Helena .
Don't take Helena's side .
If you continue treating Hermia so badly , you'll pay for it .
Hermia's not holding onto me anymore .
Follow me if you're brave enough , and we'll fight over Helena .
Follow" ?
No , I'll walk right next to you , side by side .
All this fighting is because of you .
Stay where you are .
I don't know what to say .
Believe me , King of Illusions , I made a mistake .
Didn't you tell me that I'd be able to recognize the man by the Athenian clothes he was wearing ?
So far I've done exactly what I was supposed to do , I put the love potion on an Athenian's eyes .
And so far I'm pleased with the way things have turned out , since I find all of this commotion very entertaining .
As you can see , these lovers are looking for a place to fight .
Hurry up , Robin , and make the night dark and cloudy .
Cover the sky with a low-hanging fog , as dark as hell , and get these overeager rivals so completely lost in the woods that they can't run into each other .
We've got to act fast , my lord of the fairies .
I like the morning .
I often wander around in the woods like a forest ranger until the sun rises in the fiery red sky over the ocean , turning the salty green water to gold .
But you should hurry anyway .
Don't delay .
We still have time to get all of this done before daybreak .
Up and down , up and down , I will lead them up and down .
The people fear me in the country and the town .
Goblin , lead them up and down .
Here comes one of them now .
Where are you , Demetrius , you arrogant bastard ?
Say something .
Lysander , say something !
You coward , did you run away from me ?
Say something !
Are you behind some bush ?
Where are you hiding ?
Are you there ?
He's walking ahead of me , and he keeps daring me to follow him .
When I reach the place he's calling from , he disappears .
This villain is much quicker than I am .
I'll rest here .
Where are you now ?
No , you're just taunting me .
You'll pay for this if I ever see you face-to-face in the daylight .
Go wherever you want .
Oh , what a long , tedious , exhausting night !
Only three so far ?
We're still waiting for one more .
Two of both kinds makes four .
Ah , here she comes , angry and sad .
Cupid is a bad boy for making poor women go crazy like this .
I'll sleep here until morning .
If they do fight , I hope Lysander is safe !
Sleep well there on the ground .
Where's Peaseblossom ?
Here .
Scratch my head , Peaseblossom .
Where's Monsieur Cobweb ?
Here .
Don't tire yourself out , monsieur .
Oh , and monsieur , be careful not to break the honey-sac .
I'd hate to see you drowned in honey , sir .
Where's Monsieur Mustardseed ?
Here .
Give me your first , Mr. Mustardseed .
Please , stop bowing , good sir .
What would you like me to do ?
Nothing , good sir , except to help Sir Cobweb scratch my head .
I should go to the barber's , monsieur , because I think I'm getting really hairy around the face .
And I'm such a sensitive ass that if my hair even tickles me a little , I need to scratch .
Would you like to hear some music , my sweet love ?
I have a pretty good ear for music .
Let's hear someone play the triangle and the sticks .
Or tell me , my sweet love , what you'd like to eat .
Actually , I'd like a few pounds of grass .
I'd like to munch on some good dry oats .
Or maybe I've got a hankering for a bundle of hay .
There's nothing like good hay , really sweet hay .
I have an adventurous fairy who'll go seek out the squirrel's secret stash and get you some fresh nuts .
I'd rather have a handful or two of dried peas .
But please don't let any of your people wake me up .
I really want to sleep now .
Go to sleep , and I will wrap my arms around you .
Oh , how I love you !
I'm so crazy about you !
Welcome , good Robin .
Do you see this sweet sight ?
Now I'm starting to pity Titania for being so infatuated .
I ran into her recently at the edge of the forest , looking for sweet presents for this hateful idiot , and I scolded her and argued with her .
She had put a wreath of fresh , fragrant flowers around his hairy forehead , and the drops of dew that lay in the center of the flowers made the flowers look like they were crying with shame to be decorating the head of that ugly jackass .
And now that I have the boy , I'll undo the spell that makes her vision so disgustingly wrong .
And , gentle Puck , take this transformed ass's head off of the head of that Athenian man , so that when he wakes up at the same time as the rest of them do , they can all go back to Athens .
But first I'll release the fairy queen from the spell .
Now , Titania , wake up , my sweet queen .
There's your boyfriend , sleeping right over there .
How did this happen ?
Oh , I hate looking at his face now !
Be quiet for a while. , Robin , take off his donkey head. , Titania , get the fairies to play some music , and make these five people sleep more soundly than humans have ever slept before .
Music !
Play the kind of music that puts people to sleep .
Play the music. , Take my hands , my queen , and we'll lull these people to sleep with our soft dancing .
Being too old to marry someone young .
Or else their guardians and advisors said no , What hell , to have your love life determined by someone else !
That's how intense things like love are quickly destroyed .
If true lovers are always thwarted , then it must be a rule of fate .
That's the right attitude .
So , listen , Hermia .
I have an aunt who is a widow , who's very rich and doesn't have any children .
She lives about twenty miles from Athens , and she thinks of me as a son .
I could marry you there , gentle Hermia , where the strict laws of Athens can't touch us .
So here's the plan .
Listen , Fairy King .
I can hear the lark singing .
Morning's here .
While we're walking , you can tell me how I ended up sleeping on the ground with these humans last night .
One of you go find the forest ranger .
Unleash the dogs in the western valley .
Let them go .
Now go find the forest ranger .
My beautiful queen , we'll go up the mountain and listen to the hounds as their barking echoes in the cliffs and sounds like music .
I was with the heroes Hercules and Cadmus once , when their Spartan hunting dogs cornered a bear .
The forests , the skies , the mountains , everything around us seemed to echo the barks of the hounds .
I'd never heard such raucous music , such pleasant thunder .
I don't understand why they're all here together .
But tell me , Egeus .
Isn't today the day when Hermia has to tell us her decision about whether she'll marry Demetrius ?
It is , my lord .
Go tell the hunters to blow their horns and wake them up .
Good morning , my friends .
Valentine's Day is over .
Are you lovebirds only starting to pair up now ?
Forgive us , my lord .
Please , all of you , stand up .
My lord , what I say may be a little confused , since I'm half asleep and half awake .
I swear , at the moment I really couldn't tell you how I ended up here .
But I think , I want to tell you the truth , and now that I think about it , I think this is true , I came here with Hermia .
Now the only person I love , and believe in , and want to look at , is Helena .
I was engaged to her before I ever met Hermia .
You pretty lovers are lucky you met me here .
We'll talk more about this later. , Egeus , I'm overriding your wishes .
Come with us to Athens .
We three couples will celebrate with a sumptuous feast .
Are you sure we're awake ?
It seems to me like we're still sleeping , still dreaming .
And he told us to follow him to the temple .
Well , then , we're awake .
I'll call it "Bottom's Dream" because it's so deep that it has no bottom .
And I'll sing it for the duke in the intermission of a play .
Or maybe , to make it even more lovely , I'll sing it when the heroine dies .
Have you sent anyone to Bottom's house ?
Has he come home yet ?
No one's heard from him .
I'm sure he's been kidnapped .
If he doesn't show up , the play is ruined .
It won't go on .
Will it ?
No , it would be impossible .
He's quite simply the smartest working-man in Athens .
Yes , and the best looking too .
And his voice is the paramour of sweetness .
You mean "paragon." A The duke's leaving the temple .
Two or three more lords and ladies have been married too .
If we'd been able to put on our play , we would have had it made .
Oh that great , funny guy , Bottom !
He would have gotten a pension of six pence a day for his whole life .
Six pence a day would've been forced on him .
I'll be damned if the duke wouldn't have given him six pence a day for playing Pyramus .
And he would have deserved it too .
Where are my good fellows ?
Bottom !
Oh , how wonderful to see you !
Oh , what a relief !
I'll tell you everything exactly as it happened .
Tell us , Bottom .
No , you won't get a word out of me .
All I'll tell you is that the duke has had dinner already .
Now it's time to get your costumes together .
Meet me at the palace as soon as possible .
Look over your lines again .
And no one eat any onions or garlic .
If we have sweet-smelling breath , I'm sure they'll say "it's a sweet play." Now no more talking .
Get busy , go !
These lovers are saying some strange things , Theseus .
I'll never believe any of these old legends or fairy tales .
Lunatics , lovers , and poets all are ruled by their overactive imaginations .
Their story is bizarre and astounding , but it's solid and consistent .
Here come the lovers , laughing happily. , I wish you joy , my friends !
Now , what kind of entertainment do we have to fill up the long three hours between dinner and bedtime ?
Where is our entertainment director ?
What performances have been prepared ?
Let me see Philostrate .
Here I am , Theseus .
Which plays , what music ?
How will we pass the time without some entertainment ?
Keep your promise , my love .
Look , here comes Helena .
Hello , beautiful Helena !
Where are you going ?
Did you just call me "beautiful" ?
Take it back .
You're the beautiful one as far as Demetrius is concerned .
Oh , you're so lucky !
Your eyes are like stars , and your voice is more musical than a lark's song is to a shepherd in the springtime .
If the world were mine , I'd give it all up , everything except Demetrius , to be you .
The nine Muses mourning the death of learning and scholarship." That's some sharp , critical satire , and it's not appropriate for a wedding .
Short but still tedious ?
That's like hot ice and strange snow .
How can this drama be so many contradictory things ?
It's a play about ten words long , which is the shortest play I've ever heard of .
In the entire play , not one word is well-written , and not one of the actors is right for his part .
It's tragic because Pyramus kills himself .
I have to admit that when I saw his suicide during rehearsal , I had tears in my eyes , but they were tears of laughter .
Who are the actors ?
So let's see it .
No , my noble lord .
This play isn't right for you .
I've seen the whole thing , and it's completely worthless , unless you think their bad acting and their misremembered lines , which they memorized so painfully , are funny .
I'll watch this play .
Come on , bring them in .
You won't see anything like that , sweetheart .
He just said that they're no good at acting .
In my travels , great scholars have come up to me , meaning to greet me with well-rehearsed welcoming speeches , and I have seen them tremble and turn pale , and pause inappropriately in the middle of their sentences , and botch their well-rehearsed tones of voice because they're so nervous , and then break off abruptly at the end , without actually welcoming me .
Therefore , love and tongue-tied simplicity can say the most even when they're saying the least , in my opinion .
Your grace , the person who is going to deliver the prologue is ready .
Let him come forward .
If we happen to offend you , it's because we want to .
We don't want you to think we came here to offend you , except that we want to offend you with our good intentions .
Please keep in mind we're only here out of spite .
We don't come here with the intention of making you happy .
We're absolutely not here to delight you .
By watching their show , you'll find out everything you're likely to know .
This guy doesn't pay much attention to punctuation .
He rode that prologue like a wild horse .
He didn't know how to stop it .
The moral of this story is that it's not enough to speak ; you have to speak grammatically .
His speech was like a tangled chain .
Who's next ?
I wonder if the lion's going to talk .
It wouldn't surprise me , my lord .
Can you imagine cement and stone talking better ?
It's the smartest partition I've ever heard speak , my lord .
Pyramus is coming up to the wall .
Be quiet !
I'm afraid my Thisbe has forgotten her promise ! , And you , oh Wall , oh sweet , oh lovely Wall , you stand between her father's property and mine , you Wall , oh Wall , oh sweet and lovely Wall .
God bless you for doing this .
But what's this I see ?
I don't see any Thisbe .
Oh wicked wall , through which I don't see any happiness !
Damn your stones for disappointing me like this !
Since the wall is conscious , it should curse back at him .
I see a voice !
I'll go to the hole to see if I can hear my Thisbe's face .
Thisbe ?
You are my love , my love , I think .
I'm your love , no matter what you think .
Will you meet me right away at Ninny's grave ?
Neither death nor life will stop me from coming .
I , Wall , have done my part .
Now that I'm done , Wall can go away .
This is the silliest thing I've ever seen .
The best plays are still only illusions , and the worst are just as good , if you just use your imagination to fill them in .
In that case it's your imagination that's interesting , not the play .
Look , here come two noble animals , a man and a lion .
Ah , it's a sensitive animal , with a good conscience .
He's as brave as a fox .
True .
And as wise as a goose .
Oh , that's not true , my lord .
He's not brave enough to be wise .
He's not wise enough to be brave .
Anyway , he is what he is .
Let's listen to the moon .
This lantern represents the moon .
I myself am playing the man in the moon , Well then , that's the biggest mistake of all .
The man should be inside the lantern .
How else is he the "man in the moon" ?
He can't go in there because of the candle .
It's too hot .
I'm tired of this moon .
Go ahead , Moon .
All I wanted to tell you is that the lantern is the moon , I'm the man in the moon , this thornbush is my thornbush , and this dog is my dog .
Well , all of these should be in the lantern , because they're all in the moon .
But be quiet , here comes Thisbe .
This is old Ninny's tomb .
But where is my love ?
Good roaring , Lion !
Good running , Thisbe !
Good shining , Moon ! , Really , the Moon shines very well .
That's good , Lion !
Oh , teach me how you look the way you do , and which tricks you used to make Demetrius fall in love with you .
I frown at him , but he still loves me .
Oh , if only my smiles could inspire love as effectively as your frowns !
I curse him , but he loves me .
If only my prayers could inspire that kind of affection !
The more I hate him , the more he follows me around .
The more I love him , the more he hates me .
It's not my fault he acts like that , Helena .
That's true , it's your beauty's fault .
I wish I had a fault like that !
Don't worry .
He won't see my face ever again .
Lysander and I are running away from here .
Before I saw Lysander , Athens seemed like paradise to me .
But Lysander's so attractive that he's turned heaven into hell !
Helena , we'll tell you about our secret plan .
Tomorrow night , when the moon shines on the water and decorates the grass with tiny beads of pearly light ( the time of night that always hides runaway lovers ) , we plan to sneak out of Athens .
And then Pyramus showed up .
So the lion disappeared .
Sweet Moon , I thank you for your sunny beams .
But , look , poor me , what a terrible tragedy is here !
Eyes , do you see ?
How can it be ?
Oh , dainty duck !
Oh , dear !
Oh , Fate , come and cut the thread of my life .
Conquer , crush , conclude , and kill !
Oh , Mother Nature , why did you create lions ?
And so I'm dying .
Okay , now I'm dead .
Now die , die , die , die , die .
With a doctor's help he might recover and become an ass again .
I don't think a ridiculous Pyramus like that one deserves much moaning .
I hope she keeps it short .
Look , she's spotted him with those sweet eyes of hers .
And now she'll start moaning , of course , Are you asleep , my love ?
What , are you dead , my dove ?
Oh , Pyramus , get up !
Speak , speak .
Can't you talk ?
Dead , dead ?
The dirt of a grave must cover your sweet eyes !
Your lily-white lips , your cherry-red nose , and your buttercup-yellow cheeks are gone , gone forever .
Lovers , moan and weep .
His eyes were as green as leeks .
Oh , Fate , come , come to me , with hands as pale as milk .
Soak your hands in blood and gore , since you have cut the thread of his life with scissors .
Tongue , do not speak .
Come , trusty sword .
Come , blade , drench my breast with blood .
Moonshine and Lion are left to bury the dead .
Yes , and Wall too .
No epilogue , please .
Never apologize , when the actors are all dead , no one can be blamed .
As a matter of fact , if the playwright had played Pyramus and hanged himself with Thisbe's belt , it would have been a very good tragedy .
It's a good tragedy , very well done .
But come on , let's see you do your dance .
Forget your epilogue .
The clock has chimed midnight .
Lovers , it's time to go to bed .
It's almost fairy time .
Dear friends , let's go to bed .
Let the dying fire shine a glimmering light throughout the house .
First rehearse your song from memory , and make sure each note is pretty .
We'll all join hands and sing , and bless this place with our fairy grace .
If you forgive us , we'll make everything all right .
I'm an honest Puck , and I swear that if we're lucky enough not to get hissed at , we'll make it up to you soon .
If not , then I'm a liar .
So good night to everyone .
Give me some applause , if we're friends , and Robin will make everything up to you .
From then on we'll turn our backs on Athens .
We'll look for new friends and keep the company of strangers .
Goodbye , old friend .
We need to stay away from each other until midnight tomorrow .
I will , my Hermia .
Goodbye , Helena .
I hope Demetrius comes to love you as much as you love him !
But so what ?
Demetrius doesn't think so , and that's all that matters .
He refuses to admit what everyone else knows .
Love can make worthless things beautiful .
When we're in love , we don't see with our eyes but with our minds .
That's why paintings of Cupid , the god of love , always show him as blind .
And love doesn't have good judgment either , Cupid , has wings and no eyes , so he's bound to be reckless and hasty .
That's why they say love is a child .
He'll run after her .
Is everyone here ?
First , Peter Quince , tell us what the play is about , then read the names of the actors , and then shut up .
Answer when I call your name. , Nick Bottom , the weaver ?
Here .
Tell me which part I'm going to play , then go on .
You , Nick Bottom , have been cast as Pyramus .
What's Pyramus ?
I'll moan very believably. , Name the other actors. , But I'm really in the mood to play a tyrant .
I could do a great job with Hercules , or any other part that requires ranting and raving .
A lover would have to be weepier , of course .
Francis Flute , the bellows-repairman ?
Here , Peter Quince .
Who's Thisbe ?
A knight on a quest ?
Thisbe is the lady Pyramus is in love with .
No , come on , don't make me play a woman .
I'm growing a beard .
That doesn't matter .
You'll wear a mask , and you can make your voice as high as you want to .
In that case , if I can wear a mask , let me play Thisbe too !
Bottom , you're Pyramus. , And Flute , you're Thisbe .
Robin Starveling , the tailor ?
Here , Peter Quince .
Robin Starveling , you're going to play Thisbe's mother. , Tom Snout , the handyman .
Here , Peter Quince .
I hope this play is well cast now .
Do you have the lion's part written down ?
If you do , please give it to me , because I need to start learning the lines .
Let me play the lion too .
And that would get us all executed .
Yeah , that would get every single one of us executed .
Well , my friends , you've got to admit that if you scare the living daylights out of the ladies , they'd have no choice but to execute us .
Because Pyramus is a good-looking man , the most handsome man that you could find on a summer's day , a lovely gentlemanly man .
So you're the only one who could play Pyramus .
Well then , I'll do it .
What kind of beard should I wear for the part ?
Whatever kind you want , I guess .
No , you'll see , four days will quickly turn into four nights .
And since we dream at night , time passes quickly then .
Finally the new moon , curved like a silver bow in the sky , will look down on our wedding celebration .
Sadness is only appropriate for funerals .
We don't want it at our festivities .
But I'll marry you under different circumstances , with extravagant festivals , public festivities , and celebration .
Long live Theseus , our famous and respected duke !
I'll play the part wearing either a straw-colored beard , or a sandy beard , or a red beard , or one of those bright yellow beards that's the color of a French coin .
It's best to rehearse there , because if we do it here in the city , we'll be bothered by crowds of people and everyone will know the plot of our play .
Meanwhile , I'll make a list of props that we'll need for the play .
Don't leave me in the lurch .
We'll be there , and there we'll rehearse courageously and wonderfully , truly obscenely .
Goodbye .
We'll meet at the giant oak tree in the duke's forest .
Got it ?
Be there , or don't show your face again .
Hello , spirit !
Where are you going ?
I go over hills and valleys , through bushes and thorns , over parks and fenced-in spaces , through water and fire .
I wander everywhere faster than the moon revolves around the Earth .
I work for Titania , the Fairy Queen , and organize fairy dances for her in the grass .
The cowslip flowers are her bodyguards .
Their sweet smells come from those little freckles .
Now I have to go find some dewdrops and hang a pearl earring on every cowslip flower .
Goodbye , you dumb old spirit .
I've got to go .
The queen and her elves will be here soon .
He's furious because she stole an adorable boy from an Indian king .
He wants the child for himself , to accompany him on his wanderings through the wild forests .
Instead , she puts flowers in the boy's hair and makes a fuss over him .
You do their work for them and give them good luck .
That's you , right ?
What you say is true .
That's me you're talking about , the playful wanderer of the night .
When she takes a sip , I bob up against her lips and make her spill the drink all over her withered old neck .
But I slip from underneath her and she falls down , crying , "Ow , my butt ! " and starts coughing , and then everyone laughs and has fun .
But step aside , fairy !
Here comes Oberon .
And here's my mistress , Titania .
I wish he'd go away !
How What , are you jealous , Oberon ? , Fairies , let's get out of here .
I've sworn I'll never sleep with him or talk to him again .
Wait just a minute , you brazen hussy .
The only reason you left India was to come here and see that butch Amazon Hippolyta .
She was your boot-wearing mistress and your warrior lover , and now that she's getting married to Theseus , you've come to celebrate their marriage .
How can you stand there shamelessly talking about me and Hippolyta , when you know that I know about your love for Theseus ?
Weren't you the one who made him desert Perigouna in the middle of the night , right after he'd raped her ?
And weren't you the one who made him cheat on all of his other girlfriends , like Aegles , Ariadne , and Antiopa ?
These are nothing but jealous lies .
We haven't been able to meet on a hill or in a valley , in the forest or a meadow , by a pebbly fountain or a rushing stream , or on the beach by the ocean without you disturbing us .
And because you interrupt us so that we can't dance for them , the winds have made fogs rise up out of the sea and fall down on the rivers so that the rivers flood , just to get revenge on you .
So all the work that oxen and farmers have done in plowing the fields has been for nothing , because the unripe grain has rotted before it was ripe .
Sheep pens are empty in the middle of the flooded fields , and the crows get fat from eating the dead bodies of infected sheep .
So the pale , angry moon , who controls the tides , fills the air with diseases .
Spring , summer , fertile autumn and angry winter have all changed places , and now the confused world doesn't know which is which .
And this is all because of our argument .
We are responsible for this .
Do something about it , then .
You have the power to fix it .
Why would Titania want to argue with her Oberon ?
All I'm asking for is to have that little human boy as part of my crew .
Get over it .
I won't give up this child for all of Fairyland .
How long do you plan to stay here in this forest ?
Maybe until after Theseus's wedding day .
If you behave yourself and join us in our circle dance and moonlight celebrations , then you can come with us .
If not , leave me alone , and I'll stay away from your turf .
Give me that boy and I'll come with you .
Not for your entire fairy kingdom. , Come , fairies , let's go .
We're going to have an out-and-out brawl if I stay any longer .
Well , go on your way , then .
You won't leave this grove until I've paid you back for this insult .
Yes , I remember .
You couldn't see him , but I could .
He took aim at a beautiful young virgin who was sitting on a throne in the western part of the world , and he shot his arrow of love well enough to have pierced a hundred thousand hearts .
But I could see that Cupid's fiery arrow was put out by watery , virginal moonbeams , so the royal virgin continued her virginal thoughts without being interrupted by thoughts of love .
But I paid attention to where Cupid's arrow fell .
It fell on a little western flower , which used to be white as milk but now has turned purple from being wounded by the arrow of love .
Young girls call it "love-in-idleness." Bring me that flower .
I showed it to you once .
If its juice is put on someone's eyelids while they're asleep , that person will fall in love with the next living creature he or she sees .
Bring me this plant , and get back here before the sea monster has time to swim three miles .
I could go around the world in forty minutes .
When I have the juice of that flower , I'll trickle some drops of it on Titania's eyes while she's sleeping .
She'll fall madly in love with the first thing she sees when she wakes up , even if it's a lion , a bear , a wolf , a bull , a monkey , or an ape .
And before I make her normal again , I can cure her by treating her with another plant , I'll make her give me that little boy as my page .
But who's that coming this way ?
Look , I don't love you , so stop following me around .
Where are Lysander and beautiful Hermia ?
Lysander I want to stop , but Hermia stops my heart from beating .
You told me they escaped into this forest .
And here I am , going crazy in the middle of the woods because I can't find my Hermia .
Go away , get out of here , and stop following me .
You attract me to you , you cruel magnet !
But you must not attract iron , because my heart is as true as steel .
If you let go of your power to attract me , I won't have any power to follow you .
Do I ask you to follow me ?
Do I speak to you kindly ?
Don't I tell you in the clearest terms that I do not and can not love you ?
Yes , but that makes me love you even more .
I'm your little dog , Demetrius .
The more you beat me , the more I'll love you .
Treat me like you would treat a dog , kick me , hit me , neglect me , try to lose me .
Just let me follow behind you , even though I'm not good enough for you .
Just looking at you makes me sick .
And I get sick when I can't look at you .
I rely on your virtue to protect me .
This forest doesn't seem deserted when you're here , because you are all the world to me .
So how can anyone say I'm alone , when the whole world is here to look at me ?
I'll run away from you and hide in the bushes , and leave you to the mercy of wild animals .
The wildest animal isn't as cruel as you are .
Leave me alone .
Or if you follow me , you'd better understand that I'll do something bad to you in the forest .
Yes , you already hurt me in the church , in the town , and in the fields .
Shame on you , Demetrius !
Your behavior is an insult to all women .
We can not fight for love as men can .
I'll follow you and turn this hell I'm in into a kind of heaven .
Goodbye , nymph .
Before he leaves this part of the forest , you'll change places : you'll be the one running away , and he'll be in love with you .
Do you have the flower ?
Welcome , traveler .
Yes , here it is .
Please , give it to me .
Thanks , good Egeus .
What's new with you ?
I'm here , full of anger , to complain about my daughter Hermia. , Step forward , Demetrius. , My lord , this man , Demetrius , has my permission to marry her. , Step forward , Lysander. , But this other man , Lysander , has cast a magic spell over my child's heart. , You , you , Lysander , you've given her poems , and exchanged tokens of love with my daughter .
You've pretended to be in love with her , singing fake love songs softly at her window by moonlight , and you've captured her imagination by giving her locks of your hair , rings , toys , trinkets , knickknacks , little presents , flowers , and candies , things that can really influence an impressionable young person .
You've connived to steal my daughter's heart , making her stubborn and harsh instead of obedient ( like she should be ) . , And , my gracious duke , if she won't agree to marry Demetrius right now , I ask you to let me exercise the right that all fathers have in Athens .
Since she belongs to me , I can do what I want with her , as the law says : I can either make her marry Demetrius , or have her killed .
What do you have to say for yourself , Hermia ?
Demetrius is an admirable man .
Titania sleeps there sometimes at night , lulled to sleep among the flowers by dances and other delights .
Snakes shed their skin there , and the shed skin is wide enough to wrap a fairy in .
I'll put the juice of this flower on Titania's eyes , and fill her with horrible delusions and desires .
Don't worry , sir .
I'm at your service .
Okay , let's go !
Everything's fine now .
One of us will stay and stand guard .
Whatever you see first when you wake up , think of it as your true love .
Wake up when something nasty is nearby .
Let's do that , Lysander .
I'm going to rest my head on this little slope .
We'll have one heart , one bed , two bodies , and one faithful vow .
No , Lysander .
Don't sleep so close to me .
I just meant that our hearts are joined , so we can almost think of them as one heart .
So let me sleep next to you .
Stay away for now , and good night , my sweet friend .
I hope your love for me remains this strong for your entire life !
Amen to that .
I'll sleep over here .
Stop , Demetrius !
Stop , even if only to kill me .
I'm telling you , get out of here , and don't follow me around like this .
Oh , will you leave me alone in the dark ?
Don't .
Stay here at your own risk .
I'm going on alone .
Oh , I'm out of breath from this foolish chase .
The more I pray , the less I get out of it .
Hermia is lucky , wherever she is , because she has beautiful eyes .
How did her eyes get so bright ?
Not from crying .
If that's the case , tears wash my eyes more than hers .
No , no , I'm as ugly as a bear , since animals that see me run away in terror .
So it's no surprise that Demetrius runs away from me as if I were a monster .
What evil and deceitful mirror made me think I could rival Hermia's starry eyes ?
Don't say that , Lysander .
Don't say that .
Why do you care that he loves Hermia ?
What does it matter ?
Happy with Hermia ?
No .
I regret all the boring time I wasted with her .
I don't love Hermia ; I love Helena .
Fruits and vegetables don't ripen until the right season of the year .
Likewise , I'm young , and my sense of reason has just ripened .
Is it not enough , is it not enough , young man , that I'll never be pretty enough to get a kind look from Demetrius ?
Do you have to harp on my inadequacy ?
But goodbye .
I have to tell you , I thought you were a much kinder person than this .
Oh , how awful that a lady who's been rejected by one man should therefore be treated horribly by another one !
Are we all here ?
Right on time .
This is the perfect place to rehearse .
This clearing will be the stage , and this hawthorn bush will be our dressing room .
Peter Quince , What is it , jolly Bottom ?
There are things in this comedy of Pyramus and Thisbe that will never work .
First of all , Pyramus has to take out a sword to kill himself , which the ladies in the audience won't be able to stand .
What should we do about that ?
I think we'll have to leave out all the killing , come to think of it .
Not at all !
I've got a plan that will fix everything .
I'll tell them that we won't hurt anyone with our swords , and that Pyramus isn't really dead .
And to make it even clearer , we can tell them that I'm playing Pyramus but I'm not really Pyramus , really , I'm Bottom the weaver .
That'll keep them from being afraid .
All right , we'll have a prologue then .
We'll write it in alternating eight- and six-syllable lines , just like in a ballad .
No , add a couple more syllables .
Make it eight and eight .
Won't the ladies be scared of the lion ?
I'm really worried about that .
There's no scarier wild bird than the living lion , and we should remember that .
So we need another prologue to tell everyone he's not a real lion .
No , we can just announce the actor's name , and let his face show through the lion costume , and have him say something himself .
Because , you know , Pyramus and Thisbe meet by moonlight .
So is Lysander .
You're right , Lysander's admirable too .
But since your father doesn't want him to marry you , you have to consider Demetrius to be the better man .
I wish my father could see them with my eyes .
No , you must see them as your father sees them .
Your grace , please forgive me .
But please , tell me the worst thing that could happen to me if I refuse to marry Demetrius .
So think carefully about what you want , beautiful Hermia .
Consider how young you are , and question your feelings .
Will the moon be shining on the night we're performing our play ?
We need a calendar !
Look in the almanac .
Look up moonshine , look up moonshine !
What do you think , Bottom ?
He can hold his fingers in a V-shape like this , and Pyramus and Thisbe can whisper to each other through that little crack .
If we can do that , everything will be all right .
Now sit down , everybody , and rehearse your parts , Pyramus , you start .
When you have said your lines , go hide in that bush. , Everyone else , go there too when you're not onstage .
Speak , Pyramus. , Thisbe , come forward .
Yes , you are .
You're supposed to show that you understand that Pyramus just went to check on a noise he heard and is coming right back .
That's "Ninus's grave , " man .
And don't say all of that yet .
You just said all your lines at once , cues and all. , Pyramus , enter .
It's "never get tired." Oh !
Help !
It's a monster !
We're being haunted .
Run , everyone , run !
I'll follow you .
Sometimes I'll turn into fire !
And I'll neigh like a horse and bark like a hound and grunt like a pig and roar like a bear and burn like a fire at every turn .
Why are they running away ?
Oh , Bottom , you've changed !
What have you got on your head ?
What do you think I've got on my head ?
You're acting like an ass , don't you think ?
God bless you , Bottom , God bless you .
Reborn .
But I won't leave this spot , no matter what they do .
I'll walk up and down and sing a song , so they'll know I'm not afraid .
Who'd waste his time talking to such a stupid bird ?
I don't think you've got much of a reason to love me .
But to tell you the truth , reason and love have very little to do with each other these days .
It's too bad some mutual friend of theirs doesn't introduce them .
You're as wise as you are beautiful .
No , that's not true .
But if I were smart enough to get out of this forest , I'd be wise enough to satisfy myself .
I'm no ordinary fairy .
So come with me .
And I'll turn you into a spirit like us , so you won't die as humans do. , Come here , Peaseblossom , Cobweb , Moth , and Mustardseed !
Ready .
Me too .
Me too .
And me too .
Where should we go ?
Be kind and polite to this gentleman .
Leap and dance for him .
Feed him apricots and blackberries , with purple grapes , green figs , and mulberries .
Pluck off colorful butterfly wings , and use them to fan moonbeams away from his eyes as he sleeps .
Bow to him , fairies , and curtsy to him .
Hello , mortal !
Hello !
Hello !
Hello !
I beg your pardon , sirs. , Please tell me your name , sir ?
Cobweb .
I'd like to get to know you better , Mr. Cobweb .
If I cut my finger , I'll use you as a bandage to stop the bleeding. , And your name , sir ?
Peaseblossom .
Please , give my regards to your mother , Mrs. Peapod , and your father , Mr. Peapod .
Good Mr. Peaseblossom , I'd like to get to know you better too. , And you , may I ask what your name is , sir ?
Mustardseed .
Good Mr. Mustardseed , I know you very well .
Those cowardly , gigantic sides of beef have been responsible for many of your family members getting eaten as a condiment on beef .
I swear to you , many members of your mustard family have made my eyes water before .
I look forward to getting to know you better , Mr. Mustardseed .
Take good care of him .
Take him to my sleeping area .
The moon looks sad to me .
When she cries , all the little flowers cry too .
Keep my lover quiet .
Bring him to me in silence .
Ah , here comes my messenger. , What's going on , you crazy spirit ?
What havoc have you wreaked in this part of the forest ?
My mistress Titania is in love with a monster .
I led them on in this frightened , distracted state , and left sweet
At that exact moment , Titania woke up and immediately fell in love with him , an ass .
This is going even better than I planned .
But have you put the love juice from the flower on the eyes of that Athenian , as I asked you to do ?
Yes , I found him when he was asleep , so that's taken care of too , and the Athenian woman was sleeping near him .
Why are you so rude to someone who loves you so much ?
Save that kind of harsh language for your worst enemy .
If you killed Lysander while he was sleeping , then you're already up to your ankles in blood .
He was more faithful to me than the sun is to the daytime .
Would he have snuck away from me while I was asleep ?
The only possibility is that you've murdered him .
A murderer should look like you do , so pale and grim .
That's how someone who's been murdered should look , and that's how I look .
You've pierced me through the heart with your cruelty , and yet you , the murderer , look as bright and clear as a star in the sky .
What does that have to do with my Lysander ?
Where is he ?
Oh , good Demetrius , will you find him for me ?
Did you kill him , then ?
Oh , how brave of you !
A snake could do that as easily as you could .
A snake did do it , because no snake ever had a more forked , lying tongue than you have .
I didn't kill Lysander .
As far as I know , he's not even dead .
Then please tell me he's all right .
If I told you that , what would I get out of it ?
Please give in , sweet Hermia. , And Lysander , stop acting like she's yours .
Her father loves you , Demetrius .
She's mine , and I'm giving her to Demetrius .
The privilege of never seeing me again .
And now I'm going to leave your despised company .
You'll never see me again , whether or not he's dead .
So I'll stay here for a while .
That's the way of the world .
Go around the forest , moving faster than the wind , and make sure you find Helena of Athens. , She's lovesick , and her face is pale from all the sighing she's been doing , because sighing is bad for the blood .
You purple flower , hit by Cupid's arrow , sink into the pupils of this man's eyes .
Young man , when you wake up , if she's nearby , beg her to cure your lovesickness .
Should we watch this ridiculous scene ?
Lord , what fools these mortals are !
Step aside .
The noise they're making will wake up Demetrius .
Then the two of them will both pursue one girl .
Why do you think I'm making fun of you when I tell you I love you ?
People don't cry when they're mocking someone .
How can it seem like I'm making fun of you , when my tears prove that I'm sincere ?
You get trickier and trickier .
Will you abandon her ?
Demetrius loves her , and he doesn't love you .
Damn it !
I see you're all determined to gang up on me for a few laughs .
You're competing for
Don't be cruel , Demetrius .
In exchange , give up your claim to love Helena , since I love her and will love her until I die .
Lysander , keep your Hermia .
I don't want her .
Helena , it's not true .
Look , here comes the woman you love .
It's hard to see clearly in the dark of night , but it's easier to hear well .
I couldn't see you , Lysander , but I heard your voice , and that's how I found you .
Why did you leave me alone so unkindly ?
Why stay when love tells you to go ?
But what love could make my Lysander leave me ?
I had to hurry to my love , beautiful Helena , who lights up the night better than all those fiery stars .
Why are you looking for me ?
Didn't you figure out that I left you because I hate you ?
You can't mean what you're saying .
It's impossible .
So , she's in on this too !
Now I see that all three of them have gotten together to play this cruel trick on me .
Have you forgotten all the talks we've had together , the vows we made to be like sisters to one another , all the hours we spent together , wishing that we never had to say goodbye , have you forgotten ?
Our friendship in our schooldays , our childhood innocence ?
We used to sit together and sew one flower with our two needles , sewing it on one piece of cloth , sitting on the same cushion , singing one song in the same key , as if our hands , our sides , our voices and our minds were stuck together .
We grew together like twin cherries , which seemed to be separate but were also together , two lovely cherries on one stem .
There is scorn and disdain in her eyes , and those sparkling eyes despise everything they look upon .
She can't even imagine what "love" is .
It would be bad if she knew about Benedick's love and teased him about it .
It's true .
And so she turns men inside out and never acknowledges the integrity and merit that a man has .
But who would dare tell her ?
If I said something , she'd mock me so mercilessly that I'd probably disintegrate into air .
She'd laugh me right out of my body and kill me with her wit .
Like a fire that gets covered up , Benedick should smother his love and waste away .
It would be better to die that way than to die from being mocked , which is as bad as being killed by tickling .
No , instead I'll go to Benedick and advise him to fight his emotions .
You don't know how quickly affection can be killed with a single nasty word .
Oh , don't injure your cousin like that !
With the quick , intelligent wit she's rumored to have , she can't really be such a bad judge of character that she'd refuse a man as exceptional as Signior Benedick .
He's the only worthy man in Italy , aside from my dear Claudio .
True , he has an excellent reputation .
And he deserves it , having been excellent before he had a reputation for it .
When are you getting married , madam ?
Tomorrow , and then every day after that .
Come on , let's go inside .
I'll stay in Messina until you're married , and then I'll go to Aragon .
I'll go with you , my lord , if you'll allow me .
No , taking you away from your new marriage would be like showing a child a new coat and then not letting him wear it .
I'll ask only Benedick to come with me , for from the top of his head to the soles of his feet he's a joker .
He's evaded love once or twice , and since then Cupid doesn't dare to shoot at him .
Benedick's heart is like a bell , with his tongue as the clapper : everything his heart thinks , his tongue speaks .
Gentleman , I am not the same man I was before .
I agree .
I hope he's in love .
There isn't a single drop of sincerity in him that could be touched with love .
If he looks serious , he must need money .
What , are you moaning on about your toothache ?
I repeat , he's in love .
Unless you're talking about his love for this kind of foolishness , which , judging from his appearance , he has , he is no fool for love , as you pretend .
If he's not in love with a woman , then you can't trust the usual symptoms .
He brushes his hat in the mornings .
What do you think that means ?
Has any man seen him at the barber's ?
No , but the barber's assistant has been seen with him .
And he's rubbed himself with perfume .
Can you smell out his secret now ?
But when You take up your duties too cheerfully .
That's what her mother always tells me .
Ah , he got you back , Benedick !
Congratulations , lady : you resemble a most honorable man .
Well , even if he is her father , I'm sure she wouldn't want to have the head of the old man on her shoulders !
I'm amazed you're still talking , Signior Benedick .
No one's listening to you .
Look , it's my dear Lady Disdain !
Aren't you dead yet ?
That's as good as proof that the sweet young man's in love .
The biggest clue is his seriousness .
And when has he ever been known to wash his face ?
Yes , or to wear cosmetics ?
I hear what they say about him for doing that .
Indeed , his mocking spirit has now crawled into a Truly , it all adds up to a serious story for Benedick .
A conclusion , a conclusion : he is in love .
Oh , and I know who loves him .
She'll be buried with her face upwards , then .
This chatter is no cure for my toothache .
It must be .
My lord and brother , God save you .
Good evening , brother .
If you don't mind , I'd like to speak with you .
In private ?
If you wish .
But Count Claudio can stay , for what I'm about to say concerns him .
What's the matter ?
You know that he does .
I don't know that , once he knows what I know .
If there's any reason we shouldn't get married , I urge you to tell me .
You may think that I don't love you .
I hope that , after I tell you my news , you will think better of me .
My brother thinks highly of you , and because of his affection , has helped arrange your marriage , but that was definitely a waste of his time and energy .
Why , what's the matter ?
I came here to tell you , I'll make this short , since she's already been talked about for too long , the lady is unfaithful .
Who , Hero ?
That's the one : Leonato's Hero , your Hero , every man's Hero .
Unfaithful ?
The word is too good to represent her wickedness .
She is worse than wicked .
If you can think of a more awful title , I'll call her that .
But don't keep wondering without more proof .
Come with me tonight , and you'll see a man enter her bedroom chamber , even tonight , the night before her wedding .
If you still love her after that , then marry her tomorrow .
But you would be more honorable if you changed your mind .
I won't consider it .
If I see anything tonight that convinces me not to marry her , I'll shame her tomorrow in the very congregation where I would have married her .
And since I wooed her in your name , I'll join you in disgracing her .
Remain calm until midnight , and then you'll see what the trouble is .
Oh , this day has turned into a disaster !
Oh , mischief has ruined our plans !
Oh , a plague has been prevented , thank God !
That's what you'll say once you've seen part two .
Are you all good and honest men ?
Come here , Sir Seacole .
God has blessed you with a good name .
To be good-looking is a matter of luck , but to read and write is a natural gift .
Both of which , master constable , You have .
I knew that would be your answer .
Well , for your good looks , sir , thank God and don't boast about it .
You're thought to be the most
you will And what if he won't stop ?
Then immediately call the rest of the watch together and thank God that you've gotten rid of such a criminal .
If he won't stop when he's told to , then he isn't one of the Prince's subjects .
We know what's appropriate for a watch .
Why , you speak like an experienced and quiet watchman .
Also , you're supposed to visit all the bars and tell anyone who's drunk to go home and go to bed .
And what if they won't go ?
Well then , leave them alone until they're sober .
If even then they don't answer to your satisfaction , you can say that they're not the men you thought they were .
Very good , sir .
So if we know that a man is a thief , should we try to arrest him ?
You , constable , are representing the Prince himself .
If you meet the Prince in the night , you can order him to stop .
No , by our Lady , I don't think he can .
I'll bet any man who knows the law five shillings to one on it .
By our Lady , I think that's true .
And if anything important happens , find me and let me know .
Well gentlemen , we've heard our assignment .
Let's sit here on the church bench until two and then go off to bed .
One more thing , good gentlemen .
Watch over Signior Leonato's house ; with the wedding being held there tomorrow , there's a great to-do there tonight .
Adieu .
Be Conrade !
Conrade , I say !
Come to think of it , I thought I felt a scab there .
I'll get you for that .
Now get on with your story .
Since it's drizzling , stand under this overhang with me and , like a true drunk , I'll tell you everything .
You should know I've earned a thousand gold pieces from Don John .
Is it possible that any crime could be so valuable ?
You should ask instead if it's possible that any criminal could be so rich .
Because when rich villains need poor villains ' services , those poor ones can name the price .
I can't believe it .
That only proves how inexperienced you are .
You know that the style of a man's jacket or hat or coat means nothing .
Yes , it's just clothing .
Yes , fashion is fashion .
C'mon , I might as well say the fool's the fool !
But don't you see what a Did you hear someone ?
Just the weathervane moving .
But you're all wound up about fashion , too .
No , I'm not wound up .
But I will tell you that I seduced Margaret , the Lady Hero's waiting woman , tonight .
I should backtrack and begin with how my master , Don John , arranged for the Prince , Claudio , and himself to witness this friendly encounter from the orchard .
That makes Lady Courtesy a traitor .
All ladies love me , except you .
It's too bad I'm so hard-hearted , because I really don't love anyone .
Women are lucky , then .
You would make a nasty suitor .
I would rather listen to my dog bark at a crow than hear a man swear that he loves me .
Well , I hope you stay in that frame of mind or some poor man will end up with his face all scratched up .
If he has a face like yours , a good scratching couldn't make him look any worse .
Listen to you , instructing me like a parrot would .
I'd rather be a squawking bird than an animal like you .
I wish my horse moved as fast as your mouth and was as tireless .
That's it , I'm done .
You always slip out of the argument like this .
I know you from before .
And that's everything , Leonato. , Claudio , Benedick , my dear friend Leonato has invited you all to stay here at Messina .
I told him we'll stay for at least a month , and he says that he hopes we'll stay longer .
I think he's actually serious , and not just being polite .
And they thought Margaret was Hero ?
We charge you , in the Prince's name , to stop !
Call up the Master Constable Dogberry .
We have And one of them is the criminal Deformed .
I know him ; he wears a lock of hair .
Gentlemen , gentlemen , Gentlemen , don't speak .
We
We're probably a very valuable catch for these guys .
Let's go , we'll obey you .
Good Ursula , go wake my cousin and ask her to get up .
I will , lady .
And request that she come here .
Very well .
Really , I think your other ruff is better .
No , please good Meg , I'll wear this one .
Honestly , it's not as good as the other one , and I'm sure your cousin will agree with me .
My cousin's a fool , and you are too .
I'll wear this one and none other .
I like your new wig and headdress , though I'd like it more if the hair were a shade browner .
You know , I saw the Duchess of Milan's gown , the one that everyone praises so highly .
Oh , they say that dress surpasses all others .
But for a fine , elegant , graceful , and excellent dress , yours is worth ten of those .
I hope I enjoy wearing it , for my heart is very heavy .
It will be made even heavier soon , by the weight of a man .
Shame of what , lady ?
Sex and marriage are honorable things , even for a beggar , right ?
And isn't your husband an honorable man ?
Good morning , sweet Hero .
Why do you sound so odd ?
Are you ill ?
You sound out of tune .
You sing , and I'll dance .
Never !
The Count sent me an excellent pair of perfumed gloves .
Sorry , I'm all stuffed .
Ever since you lost yours .
Doesn't my wit suit me well ?
It doesn't get seen enough ; you should wear it in your cap , the way fools wear coxcombs .
God , I'm really sick .
I just meant that you should use some holy thistle .
Maybe you think that I think you're in love .
No , by Our Lady , I'm not such a fool to think what I please , and I don't please to think what I can , and in fact I can not think , even if I could think my heart right past thinking , that you are in love or that you will be in love or even that you can be in love .
But Benedick was once an enemy of love as well , and now he's become a real man .
He swore that he'd never get married , but now , despite his earlier protestations , he loves ungrudgingly .
And yet I think you look with your eyes just like every other woman does .
It's not a false gallop , anyway .
Madam , we have to go : the Prince , the Count , Signior Benedick , Don John , and all the gentlemen of the town have come to bring you to church .
Good cousin , good Meg , good Ursula , come help me get dressed .
What do you want from me , my good man ?
Indeed , sir , it is .
Yes , it truly is .
What's the news , my good friends ?
Sorry , sir , Goodman Verges tends to ramble .
Thank you for saying that , your Worship , but we're just the poor duke's officers .
But truly , if I were as
Oh , so you'd give me all your tediousness ?
Yes , even if I had a thousand more pounds than that , for I hear that you are Me , too .
God gives those gifts , I had nothing to do with it .
Now I must return to the wedding .
One more thing , sir .
Examine them yourselves , then bring me your findings .
Now I'm in a great hurry , as I'm sure you can see .
Goodbye .
My lord , they're waiting for you to give your daughter away to Claudio .
I'm coming .
Go to Francis Seacole , the constable of the watch .
Tell him to bring his pen and his inkwell to the jail .
We won't hold back any of our wisdom .
We'll drive them to a
I am being serious , my lord .
Thank you .
I'm not a man who talks a lot , but I thank you .
If it pleases you , your highness , will you lead us all inside ?
Give me your hand , Leonato .
We will go in together .
Benedick , did you notice Signior Leonato's daughter ?
I saw her , but I didn't notice her .
Isn't she a well-mannered young lady ?
Do you want my true opinion ?
Or do you want me to criticize her like I do all women ?
No , please , speak seriously .
Well , it seems to me that she is too short to be praised highly , too dark to be praised fairly , and too small to be praised greatly .
I can only say this about her : if she looked different than she does , she would be ugly , and since she can't be anything but herself , I don't like her .
You think I'm kidding .
Please tell me seriously what you think of her .
All right , Friar Francis , let's keep this short .
No .
No , he comes to be married Lady , do you come here to be married to this count ?
I do .
If either of you knows any secret reason why you two should not be joined in marriage , I order you on your souls to say so .
Do you know any , Hero ?
None , my lord .
Do you know any , count ?
I'm sure I can answer for him , he doesn't know any , either .
Oh , the things men dare to do !
The things men are allowed to do !
The things men do daily , not knowing what they're doing !
What , are we playing with interjections ?
Well then , add some interjections that indicate laughter , like Hold on , Friar .
As freely , son , as God gave her to me .
And what should I give you that would be equal in value to this rare and precious gift ?
Nothing , sir , except grandchildren .
There , Leonato , take your daughter back .
She only appears honorable from the outside .
Look , how she blushes like a virgin !
Oh , sin can disguise itself so artfully !
Doesn't that rising blush suggest that she is virtuous and innocent ?
All of you who are looking at her , wouldn't you swear that she's a virgin , judging by these outward shows ?
But she is no virgin .
She has been in a man's bed .
She blushes from guilt , not modesty .
What do you mean , my lord ?
My dear lord , if it was you who conquered her and took her virginity , I know what you're about to say .
And have I ever seemed less than modest or appropriate to you ?
Curse you for your false appearances !
Is that why you're talking so wildly ?
Good Prince , say something !
What should I say ?
I've been dishonored : I arranged for a friend of mine to marry a common whore .
Are you really saying these things , or am I dreaming ?
They're really being spoken , sir , and they're true .
This doesn't look like a wedding .
It's true !
Oh God !
Leonato , am I standing here ?
Is this the Prince ?
Is this the Prince's brother ?
Is this face Hero's ?
Are these our eyes ?
Yes , that's all true , but what do you mean by it , my lord ?
Let me just ask her one question , and by your authority as her father , order her to answer truthfully .
As my child , I order you to do so .
Oh , God help me !
What kind of game is this ?
We just want you to answer to your real name .
Isn't my name Hero ?
Who can stain that name with a just accusation ?
Indeed , Hero herself can !
You've stained your virtue with your own actions .
What man were you talking to at your window last night , between the hours of midnight and one ?
If you're a virgin , you'll answer this question .
I wasn't talking to any man at that time , my lord .
I swear on my honor that we saw and heard Hero talking to a brute at her window last night .
Pretty lady , I'm much ashamed of your shocking behavior .
What's wrong , cousin ?
Why have you collapsed ?
Come , let's go .
These revelations have overwhelmed her .
How is she ?
She's dead , I think. , Help , uncle ! , Hero , why Hero !
Uncle !
Signior Benedick !
Friar !
Death is the best way to cover over her shame .
How are you , Hero ?
Yes , why shouldn't she ?
Why not !
Isn't every living thing condemning her ?
Am I sorry that I only had one child ?
Do I blame Nature for being so thrifty ?
Oh , one child is one too many !
Why did I ever have one ?
Why did you once seem lovely to me ?
Why didn't I just adopt a beggar's child left at my doorstep , whose shame and dishonor I could have denied , not being its true father ?
Sir , sir , calm down .
I'm so amazed by this , I don't know what to say .
Oh , on my soul , my cousin has been slandered falsely !
Lady , did you sleep in her room last night ?
No , I didn't , but I did every night for the past year .
Then it's confirmed !
And in her eyes I see a fire that would seem to burn away the lies the princes have told about her chastity .
But she must be , Friar .
You see that any morals she has left are preventing her from denying the charges : she doesn't want to add perjury to her list of sins .
The princes are under some strange misunderstanding .
Two of them are completely honorable , and if they have been tricked in this , we must blame John the Bastard , who lives to create conflict .
I don't know .
If they have spoken the truth about Hero , I will tear her apart with my bare hands .
Age hasn't dried up my body or eroded my intelligence so much , and luck hasn't robbed me of so much of my fortune , and my bad ways haven't deprived me of so many friends , that they won't find me ready to seek revenge both physically and mentally , with money and friends at my disposal .
Hold on a moment , and listen to my advice .
The princes left your daughter here for dead .
Hide her for a while in your house , and tell everyone that she has , in fact , died .
Make a bug show of mourning for her , hang sad epitaphs up at your family's tomb , and perform all the appropriate burial ceremonies .
Why should we do this ?
What will this do ?
That will be a good thing .
We'll maintain that she died the instant she was accused , and everyone who hears this will grieve for her , pity her , and excuse her actions .
That's how Claudio will respond .
And even if they don't , at least Hero's supposed death will stop the rumors of her infidelity .
And if it doesn't go well , then you can keep her hidden in a nunnery , the best place for someone with her kind of dirtied reputation , away from the public's eyes , tongues , mind , and insults .
Signior Leonato , listen to the friar's plan .
And even though you know I'm very close to the Prince and Claudio , I swear I'll keep your counsel and deal with this secretly and justly .
Are you thinking of buying her ?
But tell me , are you speaking seriously ?
Or are you just teasing ?
If I'm going to sing along with you , I need to know what key you're singing in .
I think she's the most wonderful woman I've ever laid eyes on .
I'm still young enough to see without glasses , and I don't see what you're talking about .
But , hey , this doesn't mean you're looking to get married , does it ?
Even if I had sworn never to marry , I wouldn't trust myself to keep that promise if Hero would marry me .
What's going on these days ?
Isn't there one man left in the world who knows not to take a wife ?
Look , Don Pedro has come back for you .
This is a good agreement .
Come , lady ; you must die in order to live .
Hopefully , your wedding day is only postponed .
Have patience and endure .
Lady Beatrice , have you been crying this entire time ?
Yes , and I'll keep crying a while longer .
I don't wish that on you .
I really believe your cousin was falsely accused .
Oh , the man who avenged her could ask anything of me !
Is there any way I could show such friendship to you ?
A very clear way , but there is no friend who will undertake it .
Can a man do it ?
It's a job meant for a man , but not you .
There is nothing in the world that I love as much as you .
Isn't that strange ?
It's as strange as this other thing which I don't understand .
I feel awful for my cousin .
By my sword , Beatrice , you love me .
Not with any sauce they could provide for them .
I swear , I love you .
Well then , God forgive me !
Why , what have you done , sweet Beatrice ?
You got to me first .
I was about to swear that I loved you .
Then do so , with all your heart .
I love you with so much of my heart that none of it is left to protest with .
Come , ask me to do anything for you .
Kill Claudio .
Ha !
I wouldn't do that for the whole wide world .
Then , rejecting my request , you kill
Wait , sweet Beatrice .
My body waits here , but the rest of me is gone .
You don't really love me .
I beg you to let me go .
Beatrice , I swear , I'm going .
Not until we part as friends .
How dare you try to be my friend when you refuse to fight my enemy .
Is Claudio your enemy ?
Hasn't he proven himself to be a great villain , slandering , scorning , and dishonoring my cousin ?
Oh , I wish I were a man !
He pretended that everything was fine until the moment they were exchanging vows , and then , with public accusation , blatant slander , pure hatred , Oh God , if only I were a man !
I would rip his heart out in public and eat it .
Listen to me , Beatrice , Talking with a man outside her bedroom window !
A likely story !
No , but Beatrice , Sweet Hero , she's been wronged , she's been slandered , she's been ruined .
Beat ,
Princes and counts !
He's a proper count , that Count Sugarplum , a sweet gentleman , for sure !
Oh , if only I were a man !
Or had a friend who would be a man for me !
All this conversing has turned men into tongues , and fancy ones , at that .
The man who tells a lie and swears by it is now considered as brave as Hercules .
I can't make myself a man by wishing I were , so as a woman I'll die , from grieving .
Wait , good Beatrice .
I swear by this hand that I love you .
Don't just swear by it ; put your hand to some use that will prove you love me .
That's enough for me , then .
I'll challenge him .
I'll kiss your hand , and with that I leave you .
I swear that Claudio will pay dearly for this .
Keep me in your thoughts and go comfort your cousin .
Which ones are the malefactors ?
Sir , that would be me and my partner .
Have them come in front of the master constable .
Yes , indeed , bring them before me .
What's your name , friend ?
Borachio .
Please , write down "Borachio." , And yours ?
I'm a gentleman , sir , and my name is Conrade .
Write down "Master Gentleman Conrade." , Gentlemen , are you good Christians , and do you serve God ?
Yes , sir , we hope so .
How do you both plead ?
Honestly , sir , we say that we are not criminals .
He's a marvelously witty fellow , no doubt , but I'll outmaneuver him. , Come over here ; I'll whisper a word in your ear .
Sir , I tell you we believe you're both lying criminals .
Sir , I tell you that we are not .
Well , okay. , I swear to God , both their stories match .
Have you written that down , that they aren't criminals ?
Master Constable , you're going about this all wrong .
First , you have to speak to the watchmen who accused them .
Yes , good idea ; that's the
This man said , sir , that Don John , the Prince's brother , was a villain .
Write down that Prince John is a villain .
I swear , I don't like the look of you .
That Don John had given him a thousand pieces of gold for wrongfully accusing the Lady Hero .
That's burglary , that is .
Yes , by God , that it is .
What else did you hear ?
What else ?
That's all .
I'll get there first and tell him what we found out .
Honest to God , where's the sexton ?
Come on , tie them up .
Get away from me , you ass !
You ass !
Don't you suspect my office ?
Don't you
If you keep on the way you've been going , you'll kill yourself .
Stop advising me ; your words pass through my ears like water through a sieve .
Find a father who loved his child as overwhelmingly as I loved Hero and ask
So don't advise me .
Please , leave me alone .
I intend to be flesh and blood , not airy philosophy , for there has never yet been a philosopher who could endure a toothache patiently , even though they all write as if they had risen above human suffering and misfortune .
But don't take all that pain on yourself .
Make sure the ones who have wronged you suffer too .
Now you're talking .
I definitely will .
In my soul , I believe Hero has been falsely accused .
The Prince and Claudio are hurrying this way .
Good evening , good evening .
Good day to both of you .
Listen , my lords , We're in a bit of a hurry , Leonato .
Your highness will have to force me to tell .
It's good if you love Hero , because she's worthy of your love .
You're trying to trick me , my lord .
I swear , I'm telling you what I honestly think .
A bit of a hurry , my lord !
Well then , good bye , my lord .
You're in a hurry , are you ?
Well then , don't bother .
Come on , don't quarrel with us , good old man .
If it's fighting he is after , some of us here should run and hide .
Who has wronged him ?
Indeed , you have wronged me , you liar .
Don't bother trying to intimidate me by putting your hand on your sword .
I'm not scared of you .
Curse my hand if it ever threatened an old man like you .
Really , I had no intention of going for my sword .
Damn you , don't mock and sneer at me .
I'm not a doddering old fool who brags about the things he did when he was young , and what he would do now if he weren't so old .
Claudio , I'm telling you right to your face that you have wronged me and my innocent child .
You have ruined my innocent child .
Your slander has broken her heart , and now she lies buried with her ancestors in a tomb , ancestors who had never been tainted by scandal until you caused one with your wickedness .
My wickedness ?
Yours , Claudio , yours , I say .
You've got it wrong , old man .
I'll beat him despite his fancy fencing techniques and all the practicing he does , despite his youth and manliness .
Not a chance !
I'll have nothing to do with you .
You think you can get rid of me that easily ?
You killed my child .
Take on someone your own size : if you kill me , boy , you'll have killed a man .
He'll have to kill both of us , and indeed we're both men .
But let him start off easy by killing one of us .
Come on , kill me and brag about it !
Let me at him .
I will , as surely as I am a gentleman .
Brother , Quiet .
God knows I loved my niece , and now she's dead , slandered to death by cowards who would just as likely fight a real man as I would grab a poisonous snake by the tongue .
Brother Anthony ,
Hold your peace .
But brother Anthony , Don't , it's no big deal .
Don't bother with it .
Let me deal with this .
Gentlemen , we won't stay here and anger you further .
I'm sorry about your daughter's death , but I swear our accusations were true , and backed up with proof .
My lord , my lord , I don't want to hear any more about it .
No ?
Come on , brother !
I'm determined to be heard by someone .
And you will be , or some people here will suffer for it .
Look , here comes just the man we were looking for .
What's up , mister ?
Welcome , sir .
You just missed a fight that was barely avoided .
We were about to have our noses snapped off by two old men with no teeth .
Leonato and his brother .
What do you think ?
I think if we had fought , we would have proven too young and strong for them after all .
There's no bravery in an unfair fight .
Look : Benedick is so pale , are you sick , or angry ?
Lighten up .
Sir , don't even try to beat me in a battle of wits .
I'll meet all your attacks , even if you come charging at me with a lance at full gallop .
Choose another tack .
I think he really is angry .
If he is , that's his problem .
Can I have a word with you privately ?
God forbid he wants to challenge me !
lain .
You've killed an innocent woman , and you're going to pay dearly for her death .
What do you say ?
What , are we having a feast ?
Yes , we are .
Benedick , Beatrice praised your wit the other day .
I said you had a fine wit .
True , " she said , "a fine little one." "No , " I said , "a huge wit." "Right , " she said , "a hugely awful one." "No , " I said , "he has a good wit." "Exactly , " she said , "it's good and mild ; it doesn't hurt anyone." "No , " I said , "Benedick is wise." "He is certainly , " she said , She cried a lot at that , and said she didn't care .
That she did .
And yet for all that , if she didn't hate him to death , she'd love him to death .
Leonato's daughter had told us everything .
Absolutely everything .
And , moreover , God saw Benedick when he was hid in the garden .
But when exactly will we see Benedick married ?
Yes , with the sign underneath him that says : "Here lives Benedick the married man" ?
Goodbye , boy .
You know what I intend .
I'll leave you now to chatter and gossip like an old woman .
The wit you flaunt is like a blunt sword , it can't hurt anyone , thank God. , My lord , I thank you for your many kindnesses .
I'm leaving your court now .
Your brother Don John the Bastard has run away from Messina .
The three of you have killed a sweet , innocent woman .
Lord Babyface over there will meet me in a duel , and good luck to him then .
He's serious .
Very serious , and I'm sure it's because of Beatrice .
And he challenged you to a duel ?
He did , very sincerely .
What a strange sight , a man who has put on all his fancy clothes but forgotten his brain at home !
A guy like that is bigger than an ape , but the ape could be his doctor , it's so much smarter .
But wait a minute .
Let me gather my wits and get serious here .
Didn't he say my brother has run away ?
Come on , you .
If they let you off , then we'll have to assume that Lady Justice has lost all her power .
Since you are a lying hypocrite , we must look after you .
What's this ?
Two of my brother's men , all tied up !
Officers , what crime have these men committed ?
Well sir , they've lied ; moreover , they have said things that were not true ; secondarily , they are slanderers ; sixth and lastly , they have falsely accused a lady ; thirdly , they have confirmed things that did not in fact happen ; and , in conclusion , they are lying scoundrels .
First , I ask you what they've done ; thirdly , I ask you what offense they're charged with ; sixth and lastly , I ask you why they've been committed here ; and , in conclusion , I ask what they're accused of .
I tricked your own eyes .
They've recorded my crimes , and I would rather die than have to retell this shameful story .
The lady has died because of the false accusations of me and my master .
His words are like poison to me .
Yes , and paid me well for doing it .
He is made of treachery , and has run away to avoid his crimes .
Sweet Hero ; when I imagine you now , you seem as beautiful as you did when I first loved you .
Come , take away the Here comes Master Signior Leonato with the sexton .
Which one of them did it ?
Let me see what he looks like , so when I see another man who resembles him , I'll know to avoid him .
Which one is it ?
If you want to see your deceiver , then look at me .
Are you the slave who , with your slanderous words , killed my innocent child ?
Yes , I am the one .
No , villain , but you didn't work alone .
I don't know how to ask you for forgiveness , but I have to say something .
Choose your revenge .
I can't ask you to make my daughter live , that's impossible , but I beg you both to tell the people of Messina that she was innocent when she died .
And if your love can produce something from its sadness , write a poem for her ; hang it on her grave and sing it to her bones .
Sing it tonight .
Then come to my house tomorrow morning , and since you couldn't be my son-in-law , be my nephew instead .
My brother has a daughter who looks exactly like Hero ; this girl is heir to both our estates .
Marry her as you should have married her cousin , and I will let my revenge die .
And I feel that I love her .
I know that she is worthy of that love .
Or in the power of reason .
I was conceived by a woman , and I thank her very much for all her effort .
And then she brought me up , and I thank her for that , too .
I swear , before I die I'm going to see you sick with love .
With anger , with fever , or with hunger , sure , my friend , but never sick with love .
If you can prove that I'll ever be so in love that I can't be brought to my senses with a good round of beers , you can pluck out my eyes with a love-poet's pen and hang me on a brothel's door where the picture of blind Cupid usually goes .
Oh , noble sir !
Your overwhelming kindness makes me weep .
I willingly accept your offer and put my future in your hands .
I will see you tomorrow , then .
Now I have to leave .
This wicked man will be brought face to face with Margaret , who I believe was hired by Don John to take part in this plot .
Thank you for all your efforts .
You speak like a very thankful and respectful boy , and may God bless you .
God save the charitable organization !
I leave a slimy bastard with you , your Worship , for you to punish and make an example of .
God bless your Worship !
I wish you well .
I hope that God restores you to health .
Goodbye , gentlemen .
We'll see you tomorrow .
We'll be there .
I will mourn Hero tonight .
Please Margaret , help me write this poem for Beatrice .
You certainly deserve it .
It's just that my wit is very gentlemanly , Margaret , and refuses to hurt a woman .
Now please , tell Beatrice to come out .
I'll go get Beatrice for you , who can walk here by herself , she has legs .
So that means she'll come .
I'm really a pitiful singer .
Take Beatrice , have you come because I called for you ?
Yes , sir , and I'll leave when you ask me to .
Oh , well , stay till then !
I spoke angry , foul words to him , and with that I will kiss you .
If you had foul words in your mouth , then your breath must be foul , and foul breath is nauseating .
Thus , I'll leave without being kissed .
Your wit is so forceful , it frightens the very meaning out of your words .
But I will tell you this very plainly : I have challenged Claudio , and either he'll accept the challenge or admit he's a coward .
Now , tell me , which of my bad qualities did you fall in love with first ?
With all of them at once : they work together to create such an entirely evil person that no good ever manages to enter the mix .
But tell me , which of my good qualities first made you suffer love for me ?
Suffer love !
That's a good way of putting it .
I do suffer love , because I love you against my will .
You love me in spite of your heart , I think .
In this day and age , if a man doesn't erect his own monument before he dies , he won't be remembered past the funeral bell's ringing and his widow's crying .
Exactly how long is that , do you think ?
About an hour for the ringing and fifteen minutes for the crying .
That's why it's better for wise men to trumpet their own virtues , like I do .
That's why I praise myself , who , if I do say so myself , is quite praiseworthy .
But tell me , how is your cousin ?
I'm very sick , too .
Have faith , love me , and you will get better .
Madam , you have to go to your uncle's .
It's been proven that Lady Hero is innocent , that the Prince and Claudio have been utterly deceived , and that Don John , who has run away , is the source of all the trouble .
Will you come immediately ?
Will you come with me to hear this news , sir ?
I will live in your heart , die in your lap , and be buried in your eyes , and , what's more , I will go with you to your uncle's .
Is this the family tomb of Leonato ?
It is , my lord .
Here lies Hero , The heroic maiden killed by slanderous words .
To repay her for her troubles , Death Gives her undying fame .
So the life that died with shame Lives on with fame .
This epitaph will hang here forever , Continuing to praise Hero after I die .
Now start the music , and sing the solemn hymn .
Now I say good night to your bones , Hero .
I will perform this ceremony every year .
Good morning , gentlemen .
Put out your torches .
The wolves have finished preying for the night , and look , the gentle dawn is rising , dappling the sleepy eastern sky with spots of light .
Good morning , gentlemen .
Didn't I tell you she was innocent ?
And the Prince and Claudio , who accused her , are innocent as well , because they were deceived by Don John .
Well , I'm glad that everything has been sorted out .
Me too , otherwise I would have had to duel with Claudio .
When I send for you , come out wearing masks .
The Prince and Claudio are supposed to be here by now. , You know your job , brother .
You have to pretend to be your niece's father , and give her away to Claudio .
What do you need me to do ?
She sees you with the eyes my daughter lent her , it's true .
And I see her also through the eyes of love .
And those eyes were endowed with sight by Claudio , the Prince , and me .
But what did you want ?
Sir , I'm puzzled by what you just said .
And I'll help you .
Here comes the Prince and Claudio .
Good morning to all these lovely people .
Good morning , Prince ; good morning , Claudio .
We're waiting here for you .
Are you still set on marrying my brother's daughter ?
I wouldn't change my mind even if she were
Well , time will tell .
Just you wait .
Give him my respects , and tell him I'll definitely be there for dinner , since I know he has gone to great lengths for this meal .
Bring her out , brother .
The friar's ready .
Good morning , Benedick .
I think he's nervous , he's about to become the savage bull who got domesticated .
Oh , don't worry about it , we'll dip your I'll get you for that one .
But here are other matters to be dealt with .
Which is the lady I'm supposed to marry ?
This one , and I will give her to you .
No , you can't do that until you take her hand and , in front of this friar , swear to marry her .
It's another Hero !
Exactly right .
And as surely as I am alive , I am a virgin .
It's the former Hero !
The Hero that died !
She was only dead , my lord , as long as her slander lived .
I can confirm that all these shocking things are true .
Which one of you is Beatrice ?
Do you love me ?
No , no more than is reasonable .
Well then , your uncle and the Prince and Claudio have been deceived .
They swore you did .
Do you love me ?
Truly , no , no more than is reasonable .
Well then , Margaret , Ursula , and my cousin have been very much deceived , for they swore you did .
They swore that you were sick with love for me .
They swore that you were nearly dead with love for me .
Oh , well .
So you don't love me ?
No , I don't , except as a friend .
Come on , niece , I'm sure you love him .
And here's another poem , which I stole from my cousin's pocket , in her handwriting and all about her adoration for Benedick .
What a miracle !
Our handwriting gives away our hearts .
Come on , I'll take you , but honestly I'm only doing it out of pity .
I won't say no to you , but let it be known that I'm only doing this after a lot of persuasion and to save your life , I hear you were quickly wasting away without me .
Oh , shut up !
I'll stop your mouth with a kiss .
How does it feel to be Benedick the Married Man ?
I'll tell you what , Prince : a whole university full of wisecrackers couldn't change my mood today .
You think I care what I'm called ?
Well , I don't .
No , before !
Musicians , play us a song. , Prince , you look sad .
You should get a wife !
Into God's hands .
From my house , if I had a house , " "The sixth of July .
Before you make My lord , you could really help me out now .
I am at your service .
Just tell me what you want me to do , and however hard it is , you'll see that I'm eager to do it .
Does Leonato have a son , my lord ?
Hero is his only child , and his only heir .
Do you like her , Claudio ?
Look , if you really love the beautiful Hero , enjoy it .
Isn't that the reason you told me all this ?
But I didn't want you to think that I'm hasty in my emotions .
That's like building a bridge wider than the river it crosses .
I'll disguise myself as you and pour out "my" feelings to Hero , taking her prisoner with the force of my love story .
Let's get started right away .
Has he taken care of the music ?
He is taking care of it as we speak .
But brother , I have some strange news for you .
Is it good news ?
Is this servant of yours a smart man ?
He's very bright .
I'll get him to come here , and you can ask him yourself .
He must be very near by now .
When I left him , he was less than nine miles from here .
How many noblemen were killed in the battle you just fought ?
Not many , and no one important .
A victory in battle is twice as victorious when all the soldiers return home safely .
Claudio deserves to be honored , and Don Pedro has rewarded him accordingly .
He has an uncle here in Messina who will be glad to hear this news .
No , no , until it comes true we'll pretend it was just a dream we had .
But my daughter should know about this , so she can be prepared with an answer just in case .
Go to her and tell her for me .
Cousins , you all have work to do. , Oh , I beg your pardon .
Come with me now , and help me out .
Really , my lord , why are you so excessively sad ?
Therefore my sadness is without limit .
You should listen to reason .
I can't hide what I am .
Sure , but don't do it at full volume until there's no danger in it .
Not long ago you challenged and opposed your brother , and it is only very recently that he has forgiven you .
You have to wait for the appropriate time to let loose .
I'd rather be a weed in a hedge than a rose in my brother's garden .
Though I am not a flattering , righteous man , at least you can say that I am honest about being a villain .
Until that happens , let me be who I am and don't try to change me .
Can't you somehow use your dissatisfaction to your own advantage ?
I use it all the time , since it's all that I have .
Who's that ?
What's going on , Borachio ?
Who is this fool who wants all the fuss of marriage ?
Your brother's right-hand man .
Who ?
That pretty boy , Claudio ?
That's the one .
Hero , the daughter and heir of Leonato .
A lively young one !
How did you learn about this ?
As I was working on one musty room , the Prince and Claudio entered .
Come , let's go to the dance .
This just may cheer me up .
If there's any way I can spoil his life , I'll be overjoyed .
You'll both help me , right ?
Until the day we die , my lord .
Let's go to this great feast .
Lead the way , sir .
Wasn't Don John at dinner tonight ?
I didn't see him .
That man always looks so sour !
Just looking at him gives me heartburn .
He has a very gloomy attitude .
It would be excellent if they could make a man halfway between Don John and Benedick .
One of them is too much like a painting of a man , he never speaks , and the other is too much like a spoiled little boy , always chattering .
So , the man would talk half as much as Benedick and be half as serious as Don John , And if he were handsome , agile , and rich , too , he could have any woman in the world , all he'd need was her good will .
Really , niece , you'll never get a husband if you keep saying such harsh things about people .
Honestly , she is too ill-tempered .
Maybe you will find a husband without a beard .
And then what would I do with him ?
So you'll go to hell ?
No , just to the gates of hell , where the devil will meet me , with the horns on his head like a cuckold , and say , "Go up to heaven , Beatrice .
He will show me the part of heaven where the bachelors sit , and I'll have fun there forever .
No , I won't take a husband until they make men out of something other than dirt .
What woman wouldn't be distressed , being lorded over by a handful of dust ?
Can you imagine being hitched to a lump of clay ?
No , uncle , I won't be married .
If he is too insistent , tell him that romance is like a dance : it has its own rhythm and timing .
The wooing is like a Scottish jig : hot and fast and full of whimsy and illusion .
Niece , you are exceptionally perceptive .
I have a good eye , uncle .
I can see what's in broad daylight .
The partygoers have arrived .
Let's give them room .
My lady , will you have a dance with me ?
As long as you move gracefully , look handsome , and say nothing , I'm yours for the dance .
And when will that be ?
When I like the way you look , for God forbid your face be as ugly as your mask !
My mask is like the roof of the poor
If you wish to speak of love , speak more softly .
Well , I wish you liked me .
Tell me one .
I say my prayers out loud .
That makes me love you even more .
Amen .
Go ahead , say "Amen." No more talking .
I've got my answer .
No , really , I'm not .
I can tell by the way you waggle your head .
Really , I'm only pretending to be him .
You could only imitate his imperfections so well if you were the man himself .
Look , you've got his wrinkled hands .
You are Antonio , you are he .
In short , I'm not .
Come on , do you think I can't recognize you by your excellent wit ?
Can a good thing hide itself ?
Be quiet , you are Antonio .
A man's virtues will always show themselves , and that's the end of that .
Won't you tell me who told you that ?
No , you'll have to excuse me .
And you won't tell me who you are ?
Not now .
Who said that I was disdainful , and that I got all my best lines out of a bad joke book ? !
Well , it must have been Signior Benedick .
Who's that ?
I'm sure you know him .
No I don't , believe me .
What , he never made you laugh ?
Yes , heavily .
There's no face more sincere than one washed in tears .
And it's definitely better to cry because you're happy than laugh because you're sad !
There was no Signior Montanto in our army .
Who are you talking about , niece ?
My cousin means Signior Benedick of Padua .
Oh , yes , Benedick has returned and is as cheerful as ever .
Please tell me , who is this man ?
Why , he's the Prince's fool , and a very dull fool at that .
I'm sure he's out there dancing .
I could have sworn he trampled on me .
When I meet this gentleman , I'll tell him what you've said .
Oh , please do .
And that will save a partridge wing from being eaten , because he'll be too miserable for dinner .
Come on , we have to follow the leaders of the dance .
In every good thing they do .
No , if they try to lead us to harm , I will leave the dance floor at the next song .
That's Claudio .
You know me too well .
I am Benedick .
Sir , my brother is very fond of you .
He is in love with Hero .
Please make him change his mind .
How do you know he loves her ?
I heard him swear he did .
I did too , and he also swore he would marry her tonight .
Come on , let's get to the banquet .
Though I said my name was Benedick , I heard this news with Claudio's ears .
Of course the Prince wants Hero for himself .
Friendship is enduring except when love is involved .
Therefore , all lovers should speak for themselves .
Beauty is a witch whose spells can turn loyalty into passion .
Goodbye then , Hero .
Claudio ?
Yes , that's me .
Will you come with me ?
Where ?
Right over to that I hope he enjoys her .
You sound like a cattle dealer : that's the way they sell bulls .
But do you really think the Prince would treat you that way ?
Please , leave me alone .
Look at you , thrashing about like a blind man .
A boy robbed you , but you'll beat up the post instead .
If you won't leave , then
Oh , the poor bird .
But how strange that Beatrice should seem to know who I was and yet not know at the same time .
The Prince's fool" !
Maybe they call me that because I am cheerful .
Yes , but I am insulting myself by thinking this way .
I don't have that kind of reputation !
Well , I'll get my revenge .
Now , sir , where is Claudio ?
Did you see him ?
Yes , my lord , I played the part of a gossip and brought him the news .
I found him here , Beating ?
Why , what did he do ?
He was like a schoolboy who finds a bird's nest and happily shows it to his friend , who then steals it from him .
What , is trusting a friend such a crime ?
The criminal is the one who stole the nest .
Lady Beatrice is angry with you .
The gentleman she danced with told her you insulted her .
She speaks daggers , and every word stabs .
If her breath were as terrible as her words , she would kill every living thing from here to the furthest star .
I wouldn't marry her , even if she were as blessed as paradise .
Please , don't mention her .
Look , here she comes .
Your highness , could you send me on a mission to the ends of the earth ?
I'll go to the Antipodes for any little errand you can think of .
Really , he won it from me once before in a dishonest game of dice .
So I suppose your grace can truly say that I have lost it .
You've humiliated him , lady : you've put him down .
Why are you so sad ?
I'm not sad , my lord .
What then , sick ?
I'm neither , my lord .
The count is neither sad nor sick nor cheerful nor well , he's just civil , as Seville as an orange , with the same jealous-yellow complexion .
I've told her father , and he's given his permission .
Tell us when you wish to get married , and may God give you joy .
Claudio , take my daughter , and , with her , take my fortunes .
The Prince has made the match , and may God bless it .
Speak , Claudio , that's your cue .
For you , I give myself away and I'm ecstatic about the exchange .
Truly , lady , you have a merry heart .
Yes , my lord .
I thank my heart , the poor fool , for it keeps away from seriousness .
Look , my cousin is whispering to Claudio that she loves him .
Why , you're absolutely right , cousin .
Thank the lord for alliances !
So everyone goes off into the world except me , who stays in because I'm sunburned .
I should sit in the corner and sing that song , "Heigh-Ho for a Husband ! " Lady Beatrice , I'll get you a husband .
I'd rather get a husband from your father .
Don't you have any brothers like you ?
Your father's sons would make excellent husbands , if only a girl could catch one for herself .
Will you take me , my lady ?
No , my lord , unless I could have another husband for the work week .
You are too expensive to wear every day .
But please , forgive me , your highness .
I was born to speak cleverly , not seriously .
Niece , will you take care of those things I mentioned ?
Oh , yes , I'm sorry , uncle. , If you'll excuse me , your grace .
I swear , she's a very good-natured lady .
There's very little about her that's gloomy , my lord .
She's only sad when she sleeps , and not even then .
She can't stand to hear about getting a husband .
No , not at all .
She mocks all her suitors so severely that they drop the suit .
She would make a good wife for Benedick .
Oh , Lord , if they were married , they'd drive themselves crazy within a week .
Count Claudio , when do you plan to go to church and be married ?
Tomorrow , my lord .
My lord , I will help you , even if it means I have to stay awake for ten nights straight .
Me too , my lord .
And you , sweet Hero ?
I'll do any decent thing , my lord , to help my cousin get a good husband .
And Benedick is not the worst husband I can think of .
This much I can say about him : he is well-born , has proven his bravery in battle , and has established his good character .
Come inside with me , and I will tell you my plan .
But I'm sure he'll get even with you .
Signior Benedick served well in the war , my lady .
You had rotten food , and he helped you eat it .
He's a good soldier too , lady .
He's a lord to a lord and a man to a man .
He is positively stuffed with honorable virtues .
Absolutely , he is stuffed , like a dummy .
Please don't take my niece the wrong way , sir .
Benedick and Beatrice have been waging a war of wits between themselves .
Whenever they meet , there's a little battle .
Every month he has a new best friend .
Is that possible ?
It's arranged .
The Count Claudio will marry Leonato's daughter .
Yes , my lord , but I can spoil it .
Any obstacle or barrier to Claudio's happiness will be like medicine to me .
I hate him so much it makes me sick , and whoever can ruin his happiness will make me happy .
How will you wreck this marriage ?
I can only do it by lying , my lord , but I can do it so secretly that no one will suspect me .
Quickly , tell me how .
I think it was a year ago that I told you how much Margaret , Hero's servant woman , likes me .
I remember .
I can arrange it so that at some indecent hour of the night , she looks out Hero's bedroom window .
How will that kill this marriage ?
That part is up to you .
What will be my evidence ?
Evidence enough to deceive the Prince , anger Claudio , ruin Hero , and kill Leonato .
Is there anything else you wish ?
That's all I want , and I'll do anything to accomplish it .
Find a time to speak with Don Pedro and Claudio alone .
Tell them you know that Hero loves me .
Pretend to be very concerned about both the Prince , who has compromised his honor by making the match , and Claudio , whose reputation will be ruined by this woman who's pretending to be a virgin .
Of course , they won't believe you without proof .
If you make the accusation convincingly , then my cunning won't fail me .
I'll go now to find out the date of the wedding .
Boy !
Yes Signior ?
In my bedroom window there is a book .
Go get it and bring it to me here in the orchard .
I'm already here , sir .
I see that you are here , but I'd like you to go there and then come back again .
I knew him when he listened to nothing but the military drum and fife ; now he would rather hear the sweet and refined music of the tabor and pipe .
I knew him when he would've walked ten miles to see a well-crafted suit of armor ; now he spends ten nights awake in his room designing himself a fancy new jacket .
I'm not sure , but I don't think so .
I can't promise that love won't transform me , but I can promise you this : until I truly fall in love , a woman will never make me act like such a fool .
Ha !
Look , it's the Prince and Mr. Love .
I'll hide in the arbor .
Well , should we hear some music ?
Yes , my lord .
Come on , Balthasar , let's hear that song again .
Oh , my good lord , don't make me insult music again with my awful singing .
Come on , please sing .
Just know this before I begin : I can't play a single note that's worthy of note .
Listen to him speaking in quarter notes !
That's a good song .
And a bad singer , my lord .
Yes , do you hear me , Balthasar ?
Please , get some excellent music , because tomorrow we want to serenade Lady Hero at her bedroom window .
I'll do the best I can , my lord .
Please do .
Goodbye .
Come here , Leonato .
What was it that you told me today , that your niece Beatrice was in love with Signior Benedick ?
Oh yes .
I didn't , either .
But how wonderful that she should be so fond of Signior Benedick , whom she has always appeared to hate .
Really , my lord , I don't know what to make of it , but she loves him with such a passion that it's past all understanding .
Maybe she's just pretending .
Yes , that's quite likely .
Oh God !
Pretending ?
No one has ever faked passion as skillfully as this , then .
Why , what symptoms of love does she exhibit ?
What symptoms , my lord ?
She will have a seat , you heard my daughter tell you how .
Yes , she did tell us .
Please , please tell me !
This is amazing .
I would have thought she was invincible against any assault of love .
I would have sworn that , too , my lord , especially against Benedick .
Has she told Benedick how she feels ?
No , and she swears she never will .
That's what's driving her crazy .
It's true , Hero says so .
My daughter told me everything .
Now that you speak of paper , I remember a funny story of Hero's .
Oh , you mean when Beatrice writes a letter and Hero sees that it has "Benedick" and "Beatrice" written all over it ?
Yes , that's the one .
Oh , she tears that letter into a thousand small pieces and berates herself for being so forward as to write a letter to a man she knows would mock her .
It's true .
If she won't tell Benedick , someone else should .
And what would that accomplish ?
He'll just turn it into a joke and torment the poor woman even more .
If he did that , it would be a charitable deed to hang him .
She's an excellent , sweet woman , and there's no doubt that she is virtuous .
And she is very smart .
Oh , my lord , when wisdom and passion are in one body , it's ten to one that the passion will win .
I am sorry for her , as I should be , since I am both her uncle and her guardian .
I wish she were in love with me instead .
I would have thrown away all other considerations and made her my wife .
Please , tell Benedick about her feelings and see what he has to say .
Is that a good idea , do you think ?
Hero thinks Beatrice will surely die , for she says she'll die if he doesn't love her , and that she'll die before she tells him , and she'll die if he woos her and she's made to hold back even one of her usual insults .
She's probably right .
If she offers him her love , it's very possible that he'll scorn it , since , as we all know , he tends to be contemptuous .
He's a very proper man .
And I swear to God he's very smart .
He does indeed show sparks of something like wit .
It's entirely possible .
I can see you don't like this gentleman .
No , absolutely not .
But please tell me , who's his best friend ?
He spends most of his time with the good , noble Claudio .
Oh God , Benedick will plague him like a disease !
God help Claudio !
If he's caught the Benedick , he'll lose all his money before he's cured .
I'm going to make sure I stay on your good side , lady .
Do that , my friend .
You will never fall victim to Benedick's charms , my niece .
No , not until we see a hot January .
Don Pedro is here .
If he fears God , he must necessarily keep the peace .
If he breaks the peace , he ought to enter into a quarrel with fear and trembling .
Well , I'm sorry for your niece .
Should we go find Benedick and tell him about Beatrice's love ?
Against my will , I've been told to bring you in to dinner .
Lovely Beatrice , I thank you for taking the pains to tell me that .
I didn't take any more pains bringing this message than you took pains in thanking me .
If the job had been painful , I would not have come .
So you took pleasure in bringing me this message ?
Yes , as much pleasure as one might take in choking a bird at knifepoint .
You don't want to eat , sir ?
Goodbye , then .
Ha !
Against my will , I've been told to bring you in to dinner." There's a double meaning in that .
I didn't take any more pains bringing this message than you took pains in thanking me." That's like saying , "Any thing I do for you is as easy as saying 'thank you.'" If this doesn't move me to take pity on her , I'm a horrible person .
If I don't love her , I'm completely
Margaret , run into the sitting room .
You'll find Beatrice there , talking to Claudio and the Prince .
Whisper to her that Ursula and I are walking in the orchard and that we're talking all about her .
Tell her you heard us , and that she should sneak into the arbor where the crisscrossing branches overhead keep the honeysuckles out of the sun .
She can hide there and eavesdrop on our conversation .
This is your job .
Do it well , and then leave us .
I'll make her come right away , I promise you .
All right Ursula , as Beatrice arrives , we'll be walking up and down this alley and speaking about nothing but Benedick .
Whenever I mention him , praise him more than any man deserves .
It'll be my job to talk about how Benedick is sick with love for Beatrice .
Let's start .
But are you sure that Benedick loves Beatrice that much ?
That's what the Prince and my fiance say .
And did they ask you to tell Beatrice about this , madam ?
They did want me to tell her , but I persuaded them that , if they truly loved Benedick , they would try to get him to battle his emotions and keep Beatrice in the dark .
Why did you do that ?
Doesn't Benedick deserve as much luck with a mate as he would have with Beatrice ?
What's the matter , lieutenant ?
I'll beat him until the welts look like basket-weave !
You'll beat me ?
Are you talking , you villain ?
No , don't hit him , lieutenant !
Please , sir , restrain yourself .
Let me go , or I'll knock you on the head .
Come on , you're drunk .
Drunk ?
No , lieutenant , God , gentlemen , Help , Lieutenant , sir , Montano , Help , men ! , The night guard is coming !
Who's sounding that alarm ?
The whole town will riot !
You'll be ashamed of this forever !
What is the matter here ?
I'll kill him !
Stop right now !
Stop !
Stop !
The general is talking to you !
Stop , for God's sake !
For heaven's sake , stop this savage brawl !
The next man who swings his sword must not care about his life , because the instant he strikes , he dies .
Stop that alarm from ringing , it's scaring the islanders .
What's the matter here , gentlemen ? , Honest Iago , you look upset .
Answer me .
I don't know .
I don't
I'd rather have lost my legs in battle than be a part of this !
You're famous for it .
What in the world made you risk your reputation like this and become a street brawler ?
Tell me .
Othello , I've been seriously hurt .
I didn't do anything wrong that I know of , unless it was a sin to defend myself when someone attacked me .
All right , now I'm starting to lose my cool .
That's unbelievably bad .
Iago , who started it ?
You're hitting close to home there .
I'd rather cut my tongue out of my mouth than say anything bad about Michael Cassio .
But I don't think it'll hurt him to tell the truth .
They were nearly killing each other , as you saw when you pulled them apart .
I can't tell you anything else .
Cassio was wrong to hurt Montano , who was only trying to help him , but I'm sure the guy who ran away must have offended Cassio in some terrible way , and Cassio couldn't let it pass .
I'll make you an example for the others to learn from .
What's the matter , dear ?
Everything's fine , now , sweetheart .
Are you hurt , lieutenant ?
Yes , but no doctor can help me .
Oh I hope that's not true !
You know I'm powerful enough to make you pay for this .
Please wait , sir .
Why are you talking about robbery ?
We come here to help you and you treat us like thugs , but you let an African horse climb all over your daughter .
Your grandsons will neigh to you like horses .
Your whole family will be ruined .
What kind of crude jerk are you ?
The kind that tells you that the Moor is having sex with your daughter right now .
You're a villain !
You're a senator !
You're going to pay for this , Roderigo .
I know who you are .
I'll answer for everything .
My reputation , my reputation !
Oh , my reputation , Iago , my reputation !
I swear I thought you meant you'd been hurt physically .
Your physical health matters more than your reputation .
You haven't lost it unless you think you have .
There are lots of ways to get on the general's good side again .
Go to him , petition him .
Drunk ?
Babbling senselessly ?
Squabbling ?
Swaggering ?
Ranting and raving to my own shadow !
Oh , wine is the devil !
Who were you chasing with your sword ?
What did he do to you ?
I don't know .
Is that possible ?
I remember a jumble of impressions , but nothing distinctly .
I remember a fight , but not why we were fighting .
Why do we party until we're like animals ?
You seem all right now .
How did you get better ?
One weakness led to another , to make me hate myself .
Come on , you're being too hard on yourself .
I wish none of this had happened , given the situation here , and your rank .
But since this has happened , you should fix it for your own good .
I'll ask him for my position back again , and he'll tell me I'm a drunk .
Even if I had a whole bunch of mouths , I wouldn't be able to answer that .
I was a reasonable man , then I became a fool , and finally a beast !
Oh , how strange !
Every glass of liquor is damned , and the devil's the main ingredient !
Come on now , wine is good for you , if you know how to use it .
Don't say anything bad about wine anymore .
Lieutenant , I think you know I'm your friend .
I know that , sir .
Imagine , me , a drunk !
Any man can get drunk sometime .
I'll tell you what to do .
Othello's wife has a lot of influence now .
Ask her to help you get back your position .
She is so generous , kind , and ready to help that she thinks it's wrong not to do everything she can , even more than she is asked to do .
Ask her to help you heal the rift between her husband and you .
That's good advice .
I believe it completely .
Early in the morning I'll go visit Desdemona and plead my case .
My situation is desperate .
You're doing the right thing .
Good night , lieutenant .
Good night , honest Iago .
Who can say I'm evil when my advice is so good ?
That's really the best way to win the Moor back again .
It's easy to get Desdemona on your side .
She's full of good intentions .
How am I evil to advise Cassio to do exactly what'll do him good ?
When devils are about to commit their biggest sins they put on their most heavenly faces , just like I'm doing now .
The more she
And that's how I'll turn her good intentions into a big trap to snag them all .
Hello , Roderigo !
I've spent most of my money , and tonight I got beaten up .
So with no money , but a little more wisdom , I'm going back to Venice .
You're a poor man if you're this impatient !
No , it heals gradually .
We achieve things with our intelligence , not by magic , and intelligent planning takes time .
Aren't things going well ?
My God , it's morning .
All this excitement has made the time fly by .
Go back to where you're staying and go to sleep .
Go .
Now two things still need to be done .
I'll put her on that .
Yes , that's the way I'll do it .
I'll pay you for your trouble .
Are these wind instruments ?
Yes , they are .
Oh , there's the problem .
What's the problem ?
Well , we'll stop , then .
If you've got any music that can't be heard , then play that .
But as I said , the general isn't really in the mood to hear music now .
We don't have any music that can't be heard .
Then pack up your instruments and go away .
Go !
Do you hear , my friend ?
Please don't play games .
CASSIO She's awake , sir .
If she feels like coming over here , I'll give her your message .
Good to see you , Iago .
You didn't go to sleep , then ?
No .
I'm going to ask her to let me talk to Desdemona .
I humbly thank you .
Even for a Good morning , lieutenant .
I'm sorry about what happened , but I'm sure everything will turn out all right .
The general and his wife are talking about it now , and she's defending you strongly .
The Moor says the man you hurt is very important in Cyprus , and that under the circumstances he has no choice but to refuse to reinstate you .
But he says he still loves and respects you , and based on his own feelings alone he's looking for an opportunity to safely take you back .
Please find a way to give me some time alone with Desdemona , if you think that's all right .
Please come in .
I'll take you to a place where you can speak freely .
Thank you very much .
Iago , give these letters to the ship's captain who brought me here , and ask him to pay my respects to the Senate of Venice .
Now that's done , I'm going to walk on the fortification walls .
I will , my lord .
Shall we go see this fortification , men ?
We're at your service , my lord .
I'll do everything I can for you , Cassio .
Please do , madam .
I'm sure you and my husband will be as friendly as you were before .
Yes , my lady .
But those political considerations might last such a long time that the general will forget my love and service , especially if I'm gone and someone else has my job .
My husband will never get a moment's rest , I'll keep him up at night talking about you until he runs out
But if you didn't know about it , then you were wrong to get mad at us .
I'd never play pranks on you .
If she is , you can sue me for lying to you .
Light the candles !
Wake up my whole household !
I dreamt about this .
Give me some light !
It's time for me to say goodbye to you .
It would be inappropriate , dangerous , even , for me to be seen working against the Moor , as I would if I stayed .
of patience .
I'm your advocate , and I'd rather die than give up on you .
Madam , here comes your husband .
Madam , I'd better leave now .
Why not stay and hear me talk to him ?
No , madam .
I'm very uncomfortable , and that won't help my case .
Well , do whatever you think best .
Hey !
I don't like that .
What did you say ?
Nothing , my lord , or if I did , I don't know what .
Wasn't that Cassio leaving my wife ?
Cassio , my lord ?
I really think it was him .
What's this , my lord ?
I was talking to a petitioner here just now , someone who's suffering from your anger .
Who do you mean ?
Your lieutenant , Cassio .
Oh , if I've got any influence over you at all , please patch things up with him .
Please call him and tell him to come back here .
Was that him just now ?
Yes .
My love , call him back in here .
Not now , my sweet Desdemona .
Some other time .
But will it be soon ?
Very soon , because you want it .
Will it be tonight at supper ?
No , not tonight .
Then tomorrow at dinner ?
Well then , tomorrow night , or Tuesday morning .
Or Tuesday noon or at night , or Wednesday morning .
Please just name a time , but don't wait more than three days .
His mistake was hardly worth punishing him for in the first place , though in wartime it is sometimes necessary to make examples out of even the best soldiers .
So when should he come ?
Tell me , Othello .
I swear , I could do so much , Please , no more .
I won't refuse you anything .
This is like if I asked you to wear your gloves when it's cold outside , or eat nutritious food , or do something that's good for you .
If I ever have to ask you for something that will put your luck to the test , it'll be something difficult and terrible .
I won't deny you anything !
But in return , please , do one thing for me : leave me alone for a little while .
Would I ever deny you anything ?
No .
Goodbye , my husband .
Goodbye , my Desdemona .
I'll come see you right away .
God help me , I love you !
My noble lord , What is it , Iago ?
When you were wooing Desdemona , did Michael Cassio know about it ?
Yes , he knew about it the whole time .
Why do you ask ?
Why are you curious , Iago ?
I didn't realize he knew her .
Oh , really ?
Oh , really ?
Yes , really .
Do you see something wrong with that ?
Isn't he an honest man ?
Honest , my lord ?
Honest , yes , honest .
As far as I know , sir .
What are you thinking ?
Thinking , my lord ?
Thinking , my lord ? " My God , you keep repeating everything I say as if you were thinking something too horrible to say out loud .
You're thinking something .
Just a minute ago I heard you say you didn't like it when Cassio left my wife .
What didn't you like ?
And when I told you he was involved the whole time I was trying to get Desdemona , you were like , "Oh , really ? " And then you frowned and wrinkled up your forehead as if you were imagining something horrible .
If you're my friend , tell me what you're thinking .
My lord , you know I'm your friend .
I think you are .
As for Michael Cassio , I think it would be safe for me to swear that he's honest .
I think so too .
If they're not honest , they shouldn't look like they are !
Absolutely , people should be what they appear to be .
In that case , I think Cassio's an honest man .
No , I think there's more to this than you're letting on .
Please tell me what you're thinking , even your worst suspicions .
You want me to say what I'm thinking ?
You're not being a good friend , Iago , if you even Please don't ask me to tell you .
What are you talking about ?
A good reputation is the most valuable thing we have , men and women alike .
If you steal my money , you're just stealing trash .
It's something , it's nothing : it's yours , it's mine , and it'll belong to thousands more .
But if you steal my reputation , you're robbing me of something that doesn't make you richer , but makes me much poorer .
I'm going to find out what you're thinking .
You can't find that out , even if you held my heart in your hand you couldn't make me tell you .
What ?
Beware of jealousy , my lord !
It's a green-eyed monster that makes fun of the victims it devours .
Oh , what misery !
The person who's poor and contented is rich enough .
God , help us not be jealous !
Why are you telling me this ?
Do you think I would live a life of jealousy , tormented by new suspicions every hour ?
No .
If there's any doubt , there is no doubt .
If you say my wife is beautiful , eats well , loves good company , speaks freely , sings , plays music , and dances well , you're not making me jealous .
When a woman is virtuous , talents like these just make her better .
So please listen to me .
I'm not talking about proof yet .
Watch out !
I know the people of Venice well .
They let God see things they wouldn't show their husbands .
Do you really think so ?
That's right , she did .
Well , there you go .
She was so young , but she deceived her father so thoroughly he thought it was witchcraft !
But I'm sorry I've blurted all this out .
I beg your pardon for loving you too much .
I'm indebted to you forever .
You seem a little depressed about this .
Not at all , not at all .
Really , I'm afraid you are .
I hope you remember that I said all this because I love you .
But I see you're troubled .
Please don't take what I said more seriously than it deserves to be taken .
I won't .
If you take it too seriously , it'll have bad effects that I didn't want it to have .
Cassio's a good friend of mine , My lord , I can see you're upset .
No , not too upset .
Goodbye , goodbye .
If you see anything else , let me know .
Tell your wife to watch her .
Leave me alone now , Iago .
My lord , I'll say goodbye now .
and affection , even if it's just an act .
He and I will be there .
It's true .
She's gone .
The rest of my life will be nothing but bitterness .
Now , Roderigo , where did you see her ? , Oh , that miserable wretch ! , You say you saw her with the Moor ? , Oh , who would want to be a father ? , How did you know it was her ? , To think she tricked me so easily ! , What did she say to you ? , Get me more candles , and wake up all my relatives .
Do you think they're married ?
Yes , I really think so .
Oh , heaven , how did she get out ?
My own flesh and blood rebels against me !
Fathers , never trust your daughters just because they act obedient and innocent .
Are there magic spells that can lead young virgins astray ?
Have you ever heard of anything like that , Roderigo ?
Yes , sir , I have .
I think I can find him .
giving it back to him .
That will tell you a lot .
But in the meantime , just assume that I'm paranoid , as I'm pretty sure I am , and keep thinking she's innocent , please .
Don't worry about how I handle it .
I'll say goodbye once more .
This Iago is extremely honest and good , and he knows a lot about human behavior .
If it turns out that she really is running around on me , I'll send her away , even though it'll break my heart .
Oh what a curse marriage is !
I'd rather be a toad in a moldy basement than to have only a part of someone I love , sharing the rest of her with others .
This is the plague of important men , our wives betray us more than those of poor men .
It's our destiny , like death .
We are destined to be betrayed when we are born .
Oh , here she comes .
If she's cheated on me , then heaven itself is a fake .
I don't believe it .
What's going on , Othello , darling ?
The nobles of Cyprus whom you invited to dinner are waiting for you .
I'm sorry .
Why are you whispering ?
Are you sick ?
I have a That's from lack of sleep .
It'll go away .
Let me wrap up your head , and it will feel okay in less than an hour .
Come on , I'll escort you to dinner .
I'm very sorry you're not feeling well .
hundred times .
But she loves it so much ( since Othello told her she should always keep it with her ) that she always keeps it near her to kiss it and talk to it .
I'll copy the embroidery pattern and then give it to Iago .
Heaven knows what he's going to do with it .
What's going on ?
What are you doing here alone ?
Don't snap at me .
I've got something for you .
You've got something for me ?
It's a common What ?
to have a stupid wife .
Oh , is that so ?
And what would you give me for the handkerchief ?
What handkerchief ?
What handkerchief ?
The one the Moor gave to Desdemona , which you asked me to steal so many times .
You stole it from her ?
She dropped it carelessly , and , seizing the opportunity , since I was here , I picked it up .
Look , here it is .
Good girl , give it to me .
And what are you going to do with it ?
What's it to you ?
If you don't need it for some important reason , then give it back to me .
Poor lady , she'll go crazy when she sees it's missing .
Now go , leave me .
The Moor's mind has already become infected with my poisonous suggestions .
Here he comes .
No drugs or sleeping pills will ever give you the restful sleep that you had last night .
She's cheating on me ?
It is better to be tricked completely than to only suspect a little .
What's with you , my lord ?
I had no idea she was cheating on me .
I never saw it or suspected it , so it never hurt me .
I slept well , ate well , and was happy .
I never saw Cassio's kisses on her lips .
A man who's robbed , but doesn't miss what's stolen , isn't robbed at all .
I'm sorry to hear this .
I would've been happy if the whole army had had sex with her , the lowest-ranking grunts and all , as long as I didn't know anything about it .
Oh , goodbye to my peace of mind !
Goodbye to my happiness !
Goodbye to the soldiers and to the wars that make men great !
Goodbye !
Goodbye to the horses and the trumpets and the drums , the flute and the splendid banners , and all those proud displays and pageantry of war !
And you deadly cannons that roar like thunderbolts thrown by the gods , goodbye !
Othello's career is over .
Is this possible , my lord ?
Has it come to this ?
Show me , or at least prove it beyond the shadow of a doubt .
Oh , heaven help me !
Aren't you a rational human being ?
Don't you have any sense at all ?
Goodbye .
What a horrible world we live in !
It's not safe to be straightforward and honest .
No , stop .
You should always be honest .
I should always be wise .
I swear , I think my wife's faithful , and I think she's not .
I think you're trustworthy one minute and then not the next .
I need proof !
Her reputation was as pure as the snow , but now it's as dirty and black as my own face .
As long as there are
I see you're all eaten up with emotion .
I'm sorry I said anything .
You want proof ?
Want ?
Yes , I want it , and I'll get it .
But how ?
How will you get proof ?
Are you going to hide and watch them having sex ?
Death and damnation !
Oh !
I think it would be very hard to arrange for them to have sex while you watched .
What can I say ?
What proof is there ?
It'd be impossible for you to watch them , even if they were as horny as animals in heat and as stupid as drunks .
But if you would be willing to accept circumstantial evidence as proof , we can get that .
Give me one good reason to think she's cheating on me .
I don't like what you're asking me to do .
But since I've gotten myself involved this far , because I'm so stupidly honest and because I like you so much , I'll keep going .
I recently shared a bed with Cassio , and I couldn't sleep because of a raging toothache .
Monstrous !
No , it was just a dream .
It's a reason for suspicion , even though it's just a dream .
And it might back up other evidence that may seem too flimsy .
I'll tear her to pieces !
Just tell me this : have you ever seen her holding a handkerchief with an embroidered strawberry pattern on it ?
If it's the same one , If it's the same one , or any one that belongs to her , then together with the other evidence it's pretty strong .
Oh , I'd kill that bastard Cassio forty thousand times if I could !
Killing him once is not enough revenge .
Now I see it's true .
My heart feels like it's full of poisonous snakes !
Be patient , I'm telling you .
You may change your mind later .
Never , Iago .
I swear to God I'll get revenge .
Don't get up yet .
Let heaven be my witness , I'm putting my mind , my heart , and my hands in Othello's control .
Let him command me , and I'll do whatever he asks , no matter how violent .
I accept your devotion with my deepest love .
Within the next three days I want to hear you tell me that Cassio's dead .
But let her live .
Oh , damn her , damn her !
Come away with me .
I'm going inside to think up some way to kill that beautiful devil .
You're my lieutenant now .
I'm yours forever .
Lead the way .
I'll stop at every house .
I'll reward you for your troubles .
Why do you say that ?
Oh , come on .
Where does he sleep ?
Telling you where he's sleeping is like telling you where I'm lying .
What on earth does that mean ?
I don't know where he's staying , so if I told you he's sleeping here or there , I'd be lying .
Can you ask around and find out ?
Find him and tell him to come here .
Tell him I've spoken to my husband on his behalf , and I think everything will be all right .
I think I can do that .
Where could I have lost that handkerchief , Emilia ?
I don't know , madam .
Believe me , I'd rather have lost a purse full of gold coins .
This would be enough to make my husband suspect me , if he wasn't so free of jealousy .
He's not jealous ?
Who , him ?
I think all tendencies to jealousy were burned out of him by the sun of his native land .
Look , here he comes .
I won't leave him alone until he gives Cassio his job back. , How are you , my lord ?
Hot , hot and moist .
With a hand like this you need to
fast and pray to stave off temptations .
It's a nice hand , an open one .
But these days , people give each other their hands without their hearts .
I don't know about that .
Now , don't forget , you promised me something .
What did I promise , my dear ?
I sent for Cassio to come talk with you .
I have a bad cold that's bothering me .
Lend me your handkerchief .
Here , my lord .
No , the one I gave you .
I don't have it with me .
You don't ?
No , my lord .
That's not good .
almost read people's thoughts .
She told my mother that as long as she kept it with her , my father would love and desire her .
When she was dying she gave it to me and told me to give it to my wife when I got married .
I did .
Is that possible ?
Yes , it's true .
There's magic in its fabric .
A two-hundred-year-old witch sewed it while she was in a fevered trance .
The silk came from sacred silkworms , and it was dyed with fluid made from embalmed virgins ' hearts .
Really ?
Is that true ?
It's absolutely true , so take good care of it .
I wish I had never seen it !
Ha !
Why ?
Why are you yelling at me so angrily ?
Is it lost ?
Is it gone ?
Tell me , is it missing ?
God help me !
What do you have to say for yourself ?
It's not lost , but what if it were ?
What do you mean ?
I'm telling you , it's not lost .
Please hire Cassio again .
Bring me the handkerchief , My mind is full of doubt .
Come on .
The handkerchief !
Damn it !
And you say he's not jealous ?
I never saw him like this before .
They're like stomachs and we're just the food .
They eat us up hungrily , and when they're full , they vomit us up .
Look , here comes Cassio and my husband .
There's no other way .
She's the one who's got to do it .
Go ahead and ask her .
Then I could stop wondering , and find some other career .
If his face changed as much as his personality has , I wouldn't recognize him .
God knows I have done my best to argue for you , and made him angry at me for being so aggressive .
You'll just have to be patient for a little while .
I'll do what I can , more than I'd do for myself .
Let that be enough for you .
Is Othello angry ?
Can he even get angry ?
If he's angry , there must be something seriously wrong .
Please , do so .
There must be some political news from Venice , or some dangerous plot here in Cyprus has ruined his good mood .
That's the way it goes .
We shouldn't expect men to be perfect , or for them to be as polite as on the weddingday .
I hope to God it's something political , like you think , and not jealousy involving you .
Oh no !
I never gave him reason to be jealous .
But jealous people don't think like that .
They're never jealous for a reason ; they're just jealous .
It's like a monster that just grows and grows , out of nothing .
I hope God keeps that monster from growing in Othello's mind !
Amen to that , lady .
I'll go look for him , Cassio , stay around here .
If he's in a good mood I'll mention you again , and do everything I can .
I thank you , lady .
Hello , Cassio !
Why are you so far from home ?
How are you , my pretty Bianca ?
To tell you the truth , I was just going to your house .
And I was just going to yours .
You've kept away from me for a week ?
Seven days and seven nights ?
A hundred and sixty-eight hours ?
And lovers ' hours are a hundred and sixty times longer than normal ones !
What a tedious wait !
Oh , Cassio , where did you get this ?
Has it come to this ?
Well , well .
Oh , come on , woman .
Well , whose is it ?
It's pretty .
So I'd like it copied .
Take it and do that for me , and leave me alone for a while .
Leave you alone !
Why ?
I'm waiting here for the general , and I don't want him to see me with a woman .
And why's that ?
It's not because I don't love you .
But you don't love me .
Please , just walk with me a little ways , and tell me if I'll see you later tonight .
I can only walk a little way with you , since I'm waiting here .
But I'll see you soon .
All right , have it your way .
I have to make do .
Nine or ten times I wanted to stab him under the ribs .
It's better that you didn't kill him .
But he kept chattering so foolishly , talking about you in such insulting and despicable terms , that it was hard for me to restrain myself .
But please tell me , sir , is your marriage Let him do his worst .
The services I have done for the Venetian government will count for more than his complaints will .
Do you really think so ?
What do you mean , do I think so ?
What , just because they kissed in private ?
An illicit kiss !
Maybe she was just naked in bed with him for an hour or so , but they didn't do anything .
Naked in bed together , but without doing anything ?
Come on , Iago .
As long as they didn't do anything , it would only be a minor sin .
But if I gave my wife a handkerchief , Then what ?
Her reputation is also her own .
Can she give that away too ?
But a handkerchief , God , I wish I could forget about the handkerchief !
What you told me it haunts me like a nightmare , he's got my handkerchief !
Yes , what about it ?
That's not good .
What if I'd said I saw him do something to hurt you ?
Yes , but he'd deny it all .
What did he say ?
He said he did , I don't know .
He was in bed with , With her ?
With her , on top of her , however you want to say it .
In bed with her ?
On top of her ?
My God , it's nauseating !
Handkerchief , confessions , handkerchief !
Noses , ears , lips .
Is it possible ?
This is the way to trick gullible fools .
Hey , Cassio !
What's the matter ?
This is his second fit like this .
He had one yesterday .
Rub his temples .
No , don't .
If you interrupt it , he'll foam at the mouth and go crazy .
Look , he's moving .
Why don't you go away for a bit ?
When he leaves , it's very important that I talk to you .
What happened , general ?
Did you hit your head ?
Are you making fun of me ?
I wish you could face your bad news like a man !
He's subhuman , like an animal .
Did he confess ?
Sir , be a man .
Your case is better than that .
Then I'll know exactly what she is , just as I know what I am .
You're wise !
That's for sure .
While you were dazed by grief , which isn't appropriate for a man like you , Cassio showed up here .
I got him to leave , and made up an excuse for your trance .
I told him to come back and talk to me in a bit , and he promised he would .
I'll make him tell me the whole story again , where , how often , how long ago , and when he plans to sleep with your wife in the future .
I'm telling you , just watch his face .
But stay calm , and don't get carried away by rage , or I'll think you're not a man .
Do you hear what I'm saying , Iago ?
Will you go hide ?
Now I'll ask Cassio about Bianca , a prostitute who sells her body for food and clothes .
That's the whore's curse , to seduce many men , but to be seduced by one .
Whenever he talks about her he can't stop laughing .
And when he laughs , Othello will go crazy .
In his ignorant jealousy , he'll totally misunderstand Cassio's smiles , gestures , and jokes. , How are you , lieutenant ?
The poor thing !
He's laughing already !
I never knew a woman who loved a man so much .
The poor thing , I really think she loves me .
Now he denies it a bit , and tries to laugh it off .
Have you heard this , Cassio ?
He's asking him to tell the story again .
Go on , tell it .
She says you're going to marry her .
Are you ?
Ha , ha , ha !
Do you think you've won ?
Me , marry her ?
That whore ?
Please give me a little credit !
I'm not that stupid .
Ha , ha , ha !
So , so , so , so !
You're kidding !
All right , then .
She thinks I'll marry her because she loves me .
Iago is gesturing for me to come closer .
Now he's telling the story .
She was here just now .
She hangs around me all the time .
I was talking to some Venetians down by the shore , and the fool showed up .
Ha , ha , ha !
Now he's saying how she took him into our bedroom .
Look out , here she comes .
Damn you !
What did you mean by giving me this handkerchief ?
I was an idiot to take it !
You want me to copy the embroidery pattern ?
That was a likely story , that you found it in your room and didn't know who it belonged to .
This is a love token from some other slut , and you want me to copy its pattern for you ?
What is it , my dear Bianca ?
What's wrong ?
My God , that's my handkerchief !
If you want to come have dinner with me , you can .
If you don't want to , then good riddance .
Go after her , go .
Actually , I should .
Will you be having dinner with her tonight ?
Yes , I will .
Did you see how he laughed about sleeping with her ?
Oh Iago !
And did you see the handkerchief ?
Was it mine ?
It was yours , I swear .
And do you see how much your foolish wife means to him ?
She gave it to him , and he gave it to his whore .
I wish I could keep killing him for nine years straight .
Oh , she's a fine woman !
A fair woman !
A sweet woman !
No , you have to forget all that now .
Yes , let her die and rot and go to hell tonight .
Oh , the world never saw a sweeter creature .
But that's not how you're going to be .
She's so good at sewing , and a wonderful musician .
Oh , she could sing a wild bear to sleep !
Oh , she's so witty and creative !
All the worse that she stooped this low , then .
Oh , a thousand times worse , a thousand times , and what a sweet personality she has !
Yes , a little too sweet .
Yes , that's for sure .
Oh , it's dreadful , dreadful , Iago !
If you still feel so affectionate toward her , then why not give her permission to cheat on you ?
I'll chop her into pieces .
Oh , it's horrible of her .
That's worse .
Get me some poison tonight , Iago .
I won't argue with her , so her beautiful body won't disarm me. , Tonight , Iago .
Don't do it with poison .
Strangle her in her bed , the same bed she's contaminated .
Good , good , I like that , it's only fair !
Very good !
And let me kill Cassio .
You'll hear more from me by midnight .
Excellent , good .
That's her father and his friends , who've been roused out of bed .
You'd better go inside .
No , I must let them find me .
My good qualities , my legal status as Desdemona's husband , and my innocence will protect me .
Is it them ?
I don't think so .
The servants of the Duke and my lieutenant ?
Hello , everyone !
What's going on ?
He needs to see you right away .
What do you think he wants ?
Something about Cyprus .
I think it's important .
The warships have sent a dozen messages tonight , one after the other , and many of the senators have been awakened and are at the Duke's already .
They're very anxious for you to get there .
When you weren't at home , the Senate sent out three different search parties to find you .
It's good you found me .
I'll just speak a word or two here in the house and then I'll go with you .
What's that trumpet for ?
I think someone's coming from Venice .
Look , your wife is with him .
Greetings , good general !
The duke and senators of Venice greet you .
What's new , cousin Lodovico ?
Very nice to see you , sir .
Welcome to Cyprus .
Thank you .
How is lieutenant Cassio ?
Well , he's alive .
Are you sure of that ?
Excuse me ?
He didn't say anything , he's reading .
So there's a rift between Othello and Cassio ?
Yes , unfortunately .
I'd do anything to bring them back together , since I really care for Cassio .
Damn it all !
Excuse me , my lord ?
Are you in your right mind ?
Is he angry ?
I think they want him to go home and appoint Cassio governor in his place .
I'm happy about that .
Oh , are you really !
My lord ?
I'm glad you're insane enough to admit it in front of me .
Why , sweet Othello , I haven't done anything to deserve this !
My lord , no one will believe this in Venice , even though I'd swear I saw it with my own eyes .
That was too much .
She's crying .
Oh , you devil , you devil !
Get out of my sight !
I wouldn't want to stay here and make you angry .
She's obedient , a fine lady .
Please , my lord , call her back .
Madam !
My lord ?
What do you want with her , sir ?
Who , me ?
See how well she can turn ?
She can turn and turn , and then turn on you again .
And she can cry , sir , oh , how she can cry !
Very obedient , keep crying. , Concerning this , oh , what fake emotion ! , I am being ordered home , Get away from me , I'll send for you later. , Sir , I'll obey the order and return to Venice .
Cassio can have my job .
And tonight , sir , I invite you have dinner with me .
Welcome to Cyprus .
Horny animals !
Is this the same Moor whom the senate considers so capable ?
He's changed a great deal .
Is he sane ?
Is he losing his mind ?
He is what he is .
I won't say anything negative about what he might be .
If he isn't what he might be , then I wish to God he were !
Hitting his wife ?
It's true , that wasn't such a nice thing to do .
But I wish I could say that's the last time he'll do it !
Is it a habit of his ?
Or did the letter make him emotional somehow , and this is the first time he's done it ?
Oh , it's too bad !
It wouldn't be right for me to tell you everything I've seen and heard .
Just go after him and watch what he does next .
I'm sorry I was so wrong about him .
You haven't seen anything , then ?
No , and I didn't hear anything either , or suspect anything at all .
But you've seen her and Cassio together .
Yes , but I didn't see anything wrong , and I heard every syllable they said .
Didn't they ever whisper ?
Never , my lord .
Or ask you to leave the room ?
Never .
Not even to get her fan , or her gloves , or her mask , or anything ?
No , my lord .
That's strange .
I'd swear to you on my soul that she's a good , honest person , sir .
Tell her to come here .
Go .
She says all the right things , but the dumbest brothel-keeper would tell the same story .
I've seen her do it .
My lord , what do you want ?
Please , dear , come here .
What can I do for you ?
Let me see your eyes .
Look at my face .
What horrible thing are you imagining ?
I can tell you're furious , but I don't understand what you're saying .
Go ahead , swear to that , so you'll be damned to hell for lying .
Heaven knows I am .
Heaven knows you're as unfaithful as hell .
Unfaithful , my lord ?
With whom ?
How am I unfaithful ?
Leave me alone , Desdemona , go away !
Because of me ?
If you've been ordered back to Venice because of my father , don't blame me .
You may have lost his respect , but so have I .
Even that I could put up with .
be like the fountain that my children and all my descendants flow from , has rejected me !
Worse than that , she's polluted herself , so that the fountain is a place where disgusting toads copulate and reproduce !
Even the goddess of patience couldn't look at this and be patient , it's too horrifying !
I hope you think I'm faithful to you .
As faithful as flies in rotting meat , which give birth to maggots every time the wind blows .
Oh , I wish you'd never been born !
Have I done something to offend you without knowing it ?
Was someone as beautiful as you meant to be a whore ?
What have you done ?
What have you done ?
Oh , you streetwalker !
What have you done ?
You brazen whore !
I swear to God you're accusing me wrongly !
So you're saying you're not a whore ?
No , I'm as honest as I am Christian .
What , you're not a whore ?
No , I swear it .
Is that possible ?
Oh , heaven help us !
I mistook you for that sly Venetian woman who married Othello. , You whorehouse-keeper .
You !
We've finished our business .
Here's some money for you .
Please lock the door and keep quiet .
What's he talking about ?
How are you , madam ?
Ensign , what's he doing in there ?
Tonight he boarded a treasure ship .
If he can keep it , he'll be set forever .
I don't understand .
He's married .
To whom ?
Here comes another group looking for you .
It's Brabantio .
He intends to do something bad to you .
Hey !
Stop right there !
Sir , it's the Moor .
Get him , he's a thief !
With who ?
I don't have a lord .
Don't talk to me , Emilia .
Things have certainly changed !
It's fair for him to treat me like this , very fair .
What have I ever done that he has anything to complain about ?
What can I do for you , madam ?
How are you ?
I don't know .
When grown-ups teach little children , they do it gently and easily .
He might have treated me like that , because I'm as unused to abuse as a little child .
What's the matter , lady ?
He called her a whore so many times , and heaped up so much abuse on her that good people can't stand to hear it .
Am I that name , Iago ?
What name , madam ?
What my lord said I was .
Why did he do that ?
I don't know .
I just know I'm not one .
Don't cry , don't cry .
What a day this is !
Did she give up all those chances to marry noblemen , give up her father and country and friends , just to be called a whore ?
Doesn't that make you want to cry ?
It's just my bad luck .
Damn him !
How did he get such an idea ?
Heaven knows .
I bet my life some evil busybody , some meddling , lying jerk made up this rumor to get some position .
I bet my life on it .
Nobody's that bad .
It's impossible .
If there is , then heaven help him !
Why should he call her a whore ?
Who's been with her ?
The Moor is being tricked by some crook , some terrible villain , some rotten bastard .
Oh , I wish we could unmask scoundrels like that , and give a whip to every good man to beat them senseless with !
Keep your voice down .
Oh , to hell with those people !
It's the same kind of guy who got you upset and made you suspect I'd cheated on you with the Moor .
You're a fool .
Shut up .
Oh God , Iago , what can I do to win my husband back again ?
Please go to him , my friend .
I swear I have no idea why he stopped loving me .
Here I'm kneeling to swear that if I ever did anything to destroy his love for me , either by thoughts or actions , or if I ever took pleasure in anyone else , or if I never did love him , or don't love him now , even though he tries to shake me off ,
then I hope I have a life of misery !
Unkindness is powerful , and his unkindness may kill me , but it'll never destroy my love .
I can't say "whore." It makes me sick to say the word even now .
Political business is bothering him , and he's just taking it out on you .
If only that were all it is , It is , I promise .
Those trumpets are calling us in to dinner .
The Venetians are waiting for their food .
Go in , and don't cry .
Everything will be all right .
How are you , Roderigo ?
I don't think you're treating me fairly .
What makes you say that ?
Well , I won't take it any longer .
Will you listen to me , Roderigo ?
Your words and actions don't match up .
That's not fair .
It's the truth .
The jewels you took from me to deliver to Desdemona would've made even a nun want to sleep with me .
You told me she got them , and that she promised to give me a little something in return soon , but nothing like that ever happens .
Well , all right then .
Fine .
Fine ! " he says .
All right ! " It's not fine , and I'm not all right !
It's wrong , and I'm starting to realize I'm being cheated !
Okay .
It's not okay !
I'm going to tell Desdemona my feelings .
If she returns my jewels , I'll stop pursuing her and apologize to her .
If not , I'll challenge you to a duel .
You've said what you have to say now .
Yes , and I'll do everything I just said .
From this moment on I have a higher opinion of you than before .
Give me your hand , Roderigo .
Your complaint against me is perfectly understandable , but I still insist I've done everything I could to help you .
It doesn't look that way to me .
I admit it doesn't look that way to me , and the fact that you suspect me shows that you're smart .
But Roderigo , if you're as courageous and determined as I think you are , then wait just a bit longer .
If you're not having sex with Desdemona tomorrow night , then I suggest you find some way to stab me in the back and kill me .
Well , what's your plan ?
Is it feasible ?
Venice has made Cassio governor here on Cyprus .
Is that true ?
Then Desdemona and Othello will go back to Venice .
What do you mean , get rid of him ?
I mean knock his brains out , so he can't take Othello's place .
And that's what you want me to do !
Yes , if you want to help yourself .
He's having dinner tonight with a prostitute , and I'll go visit him .
He doesn't know he's been appointed governor yet .
When you see him walking by here ( as I'll make sure he does between twelve and one ) you can nab him .
I'll be nearby to help you , and between the two of us we can handle him .
I'll give you such reasons for killing him that you'll feel obliged to snuff him out .
It's nearly dinner time , and the night's going to be wasted .
Let's go !
I want to hear more about this .
You will .
Please , sir , don't trouble yourself .
Good night , madam .
Thank you .
You're most welcome .
Would you walk out with me , sir ? , Oh , Desdemona , Yes , my lord ?
Go to bed right this minute .
I'll be there shortly .
I will , my lord .
How are things now ?
He looks calmer than he did before .
Send me away ?
That's what he said .
So give me my nightgown , Emilia , and I'll say goodnight .
We shouldn't displease him .
Yes .
I wish you'd never met him .
That's not what I wish .
I love him even when he's harsh and mean , Help me unpin this , would you ? , I love even his stubbornness , his frowns , his bad moods .
I put those wedding sheets on your bed , as you asked .
It doesn't matter .
Oh , how silly we are !
If I die before you do make sure I'm wrapped in those sheets in my coffin .
Listen to you !
Don't be silly !
She knew an old song called "Willow" that reminded her of her own story , and she died singing it .
I can't get that song out of my head tonight .
It's all I can do to keep myself from hanging my head down in despair and singing it like poor Barbary .
Please , hurry up .
Should I get your nightgown ?
No , just help me unpin this .
That Lodovico is a good-looking man .
He's very handsome .
He speaks well .
I know a lady in Venice who'd walk all the way to Palestine for a kiss from him .
It's the wind .
My eyes itch , is that an omen I'll be crying soon ?
No , it doesn't mean anything .
I heard someone say that's what it means .
Oh , these men , these men !
Do you honestly think , tell me , Emilia , there are women who'd cheat on their husbands in such a disgusting manner ?
There are women like that out there , no question .
You , Roderigo !
Come on , I'll fight you .
Sir , your age and status inspire more respect than your weapons do .
You evil thief , where have you hidden my daughter ?
You devil , you've put a spell on her !
It's obvious to everyone that you've tricked her , drugged her , or kidnapped her .
If he struggles , use force !
Where do you want me to go to respond to these charges ?
Would you ever do such a thing for all the world ?
Why , wouldn't you ?
By the light of heaven , no , I would not !
I wouldn't either , by daylight .
It would be easier to do it in the dark .
Could you really do such a thing , for all the world ?
The world's huge .
It's a big prize for such a small sin .
I don't think you would .
Actually I think I would , and then I'd undo it after I did it .
I wouldn't do it for a nice ring , or fine linen , or pretty gowns or petticoats or hats .
But for the whole world ?
Who wouldn't cheat on her husband to make him king ?
I'd risk my soul for that .
I'd never do such a bad thing , not for the whole world !
Why , a bad action is just a wrong in this world , but when you've won the whole world , it's a wrong in your own world , so you can make it right then .
I don't think any woman like that exists .
Yes , a dozen of them , as many as there are women in the world , in fact .
But I do think it's the husband's fault if we wives cheat on them .
For instance , our husbands
We have feelings .
Husbands need to know that their wives are human beings too .
They see , smell , and taste sweet and sour just like their husbands .
I think they do .
Is it out of lust ?
I think so .
Is it a weakness ?
It is .
And don't we have passions , and a taste for fun , and weaknesses , just like men ?
Then tell them to treat us well .
Good night , good night .
I pray that God will let me learn from women like that , not to follow their bad example , but to avoid it !
Here , stand behind this wall ; he'll come right away .
Quick , quick .
Don't be afraid .
I'll be right next to you .
This will either make us or break us .
I'm right behind you .
Be bold , and get ready .
I don't really want to do this , but he's given me good reasons .
I guess it's only one man , no big deal .
I know the sound of his walk. , Die , villain !
Oh , I'm dead !
I'll be crippled forever !
Help !
Murder !
murder !
That's Cassio's voice .
Iago has kept his word .
Oh , what a villain I am !
That's the truth .
Help me !
Get some light !
Get me a surgeon !
It's him !
Brave Iago , how honest and trustworthy you are !
You teach me how I should act .
Whore , your lover's dead now , and you'll be going to hell soon .
I'm coming , slut !
I've shut the memory of your beautiful eyes out of my heart .
You've already stained our sheets with your lust ; now I'll stain them with your whore's blood .
Help !
Isn't there a guard around ?
No one passing by ?
Murder !
Murder !
Something's wrong , the man sounds panicked .
Oh , help !
Listen !
I've acted like such a villain !
Two or three men are groaning .
But it's dark out , and it could be a trap .
It's not safe to go near them till we get more help .
Nobody's coming ?
I'll bleed to death .
Look !
Here's someone coming in his pajamas , with a candle and weapons .
Who's there ?
Who's shouting "murder" ?
We don't know .
Didn't you hear someone shouting ?
I'm here , here !
For heaven's sake , help me !
He's a good man .
Is that you , Iago ?
I'm here , I've been destroyed by villains !
Help me .
Oh , lieutenant !
What villains did this to you ?
I think one of them is nearby and can't get away .
That's one of them .
Damned Iago !
You inhuman dog !
Killing men in the dark ?
Where are these murderers ?
Are you good or evil ?
Judge for yourself .
Signor Lodovico ?
That's me .
I beg your pardon .
Cassio's been wounded .
Cassio !
How are you doing , brother ?
My leg's been cut in two .
God forbid !
Bring me some light , gentlemen , I'll bind the wound with my shirt .
What's the matter ?
Who's shouting ?
Who's shouting ?
Oh , my dear Cassio !
My sweet Cassio !
Oh , Cassio , Cassio , Cassio !
You notorious whore !
Cassio , do you know who might have stabbed you like this ?
No .
I'm sorry to find you like this .
I've been looking all over for you .
He's fainted !
Oh Cassio , Cassio , Cassio !
Sir , I believe this piece of trash , Bianca , has something to do with all this trouble. , Hang in there , Cassio. , Come here , bring the light .
Do you recognize this face ?
That's the one , sir .
Do you know him ?
Know him ?
Yes .
I'm glad to see you .
How are you doing , Cassio ? , Someone bring me a stretcher !
Roderigo !
It's him , it's him .
Good , here's the stretcher .
Get somebody strong to carry him out of here .
I'll get the general's surgeon .
There wasn't any problem .
I don't even know him .
Keep an eye on her .
Do you see ?
The guilty speak volumes even when they're silent .
What's the matter ?
What's the matter , husband ?
Cassio was attacked here in the dark by Roderigo and men who escaped .
He's near death , and Roderigo's dead already .
Oh , no , good gentleman !
Oh no , good Cassio !
This is what happens when you visit whores .
Please , Emilia , ask Cassio where he was at dinner tonight. ,
He ate at my house , but that doesn't make me nervous .
Oh , did he ?
I order you to come with me .
Go to hell , you whore !
As moral as me !
Damn you !
Gentlemen , let's go make sure Cassio's wounds are properly dressed. , Come on , ma'am , you can tell us another story .
Emilia , go to the castle and tell Othello and Desdemona what happened. , Will you please go now ?
To prison , until you're called into court .
His messengers are waiting here to take me to him immediately , on pressing state business .
It's true .
The Duke's in a meeting right now , and he's sent for you too .
The Duke's in a meeting ?
At this time of night ?
Bring him with us .
The law's on my side .
The Duke and any of my fellow senators will take this wrong as seriously as if it were their own .
If we let crimes like this happen , slaves and heathens will be our rulers .
I have to do it , I have to do it .
But I won't shed any of her blood or scar that beautiful skin , whiter than snow and smooth as the finest marble .
But she's got to die , or she'll cheat on other men .
Put out the light of the candle , and then put out the light of her heart .
If I extinguish the candle , I can light it again if I regret it .
When I've plucked this rose , I can't make it grow again ; it will have no choice but to wither and die .
Who's there ?
Othello ?
Yes , Desdemona .
Will you come to bed , my lord ?
Yes , my lord .
Oh , my lord , what do you mean by that ?
Be quick about it .
I'll wait over here .
I don't want to kill you before you've readied your soul .
No , I don't want to send your soul to hell when I kill you .
You're talking about killing ?
Yes , I am .
Then heaven have mercy on me .
Amen to that , from the bottom of my heart .
If you really feel that way , then I hope you won't kill me .
Hmmph !
I don't know why I should be afraid , since I haven't done anything wrong .
But I'm still afraid .
Think of your sins .
My only sin was loving you too much .
Yes , that's why you have to die .
You're wrong to kill me for loving you .
Why are you chewing on your lower lip like that ?
You're shaking with emotion .
These are bad omens , but I hope , I hope , they don't predict my future .
I will .
What's this all about ?
You gave that handkerchief , the one I loved and gave to you , to Cassio .
No , I swear by my life and soul !
Bring him here and ask him .
You're on your deathbed .
But I'm not dying yet !
Yes , right now .
So confess your sin freely now .
You're going to die .
Then heaven have mercy on me !
Amen to that .
And you have mercy on me too !
I never gave him any token of romantic love .
I saw him holding the handkerchief !
You liar , you're turning my heart to stone , and making me call what I'll do murder , when I had been thinking of it as a sacrifice !
I saw the handkerchief .
He's already done so .
What , my lord ?
That he had sex with you .
What ?
Yes .
He wouldn't say that .
No .
Honest Iago's arranged that .
What , is he dead ?
If he had as many lives as he's got hairs on his head , I would've killed them all in revenge .
Oh , he's been betrayed , and I've been ruined .
Send me away , my lord , but don't kill me !
Kill me tomorrow , but let me live tonight .
No , if you struggle with me , Just half an hour !
Just let me say one prayer !
It's too late .
What's that noise ?
Aren't you dead yet ?
Who's there ?
Yes , it's Emilia .
What's the matter with you now ?
Yes , just now , my lord .
Cassio's killed a young Venetian named Roderigo .
Roderigo's been killed ?
And Cassio's killed ?
No , Cassio wasn't killed .
Cassio's not dead ?
Then the wrong man is dead , and sweet revenge has gone wrong .
Oh , I've been murdered unfairly !
Oh Lord , who's that crying ?
That ?
What ?
Oh , no , that was my lady's voice .
Help !
Help !
Oh , lady , speak again .
Sweet Desdemona !
Oh sweet mistress , speak !
I'm dying an innocent woman .
Oh , who did this thing ?
No one .
I did it myself .
Give my love to my kind husband .
Oh , goodbye !
Why , how could she have been murdered ?
My God , who knows ?
You heard her say it wasn't me .
Yes , she said that .
I must go report what happened .
She was lying even as she was going down to hell .
I did kill her .
Then she was even more an angel , and you're an even blacker devil !
She cheated on me , and she was a whore .
You slander her , you devil .
She was fickle and unfaithful , like water .
She was utterly true to you !
Ask your husband if you doubt me .
If I didn't have a good reason to do this , damn me to the very bottom of hell .
Your husband knew about everything .
My husband !
Your husband .
He said she was unfaithful ?
Yes , with Cassio .
If she'd been faithful to me , I never would have given her up , not even if God himself offered me a jewel as big as a planet in exchange for her .
My husband .
Yes , he's the one who first told me about her .
He's an honest man who detests evil actions .
My husband ?
Why do you keep repeating that , woman ?
I'm telling you , your husband .
Oh , my mistress , a villain has made a mockery of your love !
My husband said she was unfaithful !
Yes , him , woman .
I said "your husband." , Do you understand that word ?
My friend , your husband , the honest , honest Iago .
If he said that , then I hope his malicious soul rots in hell forever .
He's lying through his teeth !
She was too attached to her filthy marriage ever to do a thing like that !
Ha !
Go ahead , do your worst .
You weren't good enough for her .
You'd better shut up !
Oh , you idiot !
You stupid fool !
As dumb as dirt !
I'll tell everyone what you did , even if it
The Moor's killed my mistress !
Murder , murder !
What's the matter ?
What's going on here , general ?
Oh , are you here , Iago ?
You've done a good job , that other men can attribute their murders to you !
What's the matter ?
I told him what I thought .
But did you tell him she cheated on him ?
I did .
Then you told a lie , a sick , wicked lie .
I swear on my soul it was a lie .
You said she slept with Cassio .
Did you say Cassio ?
Yes , with Cassio .
Now be quiet .
My mistress here lies murdered in her bed , No , heaven forbid !
You can't trust them .
It's true , they're inconsistent .
My letters say there are a hundred and seven ships .
And mine say a hundred and forty .
And mine say two hundred .
But often in these cases , reports are just estimates .
Yes , we get the idea .
It's a messenger from the warships .
And your lies caused this murder .
I'll kill myself out of grief !
Oh , evil , evil !
Are you crazy ?
I'm ordering you , go home .
Good gentlemen , give me permission to speak .
I know I ought to obey my husband , but not now .
Maybe I'll never go home again , Iago !
Oh !
Oh !
Oh !
Yes , go ahead and moan , because you killed the sweetest , most innocent woman who ever lived !
She was filthy !
I'm glad your father isn't alive to see this .
him terribly .
It would make him curse the heavens and be damned to hell .
It's sad , but Iago knows she had sex with Cassio a thousand times .
Damn it , shut your mouth .
Let heaven and men and devils tell me to shut me up .
If you're smart , you'll go home .
I won't .
Shame on you !
Drawing your sword on a woman ?
Oh , you stupid Moor !
I found that handkerchief by accident and gave it to my husband .
He'd begged me to steal it many times .
You evil whore !
You think she gave it to Cassio ?
No , I found it and gave it to my husband .
You piece of filth , you're lying !
I swear I'm not lying .
You absolute villain !
He's killed his wife !
Yes , yes !
Lay me next to my mistress .
He's gone , and his wife's dead .
Kill him rather than let him leave this room .
But why should my reputation for honor last longer than my honor did ?
Let it all go .
What did your song mean , lady ?
Can you hear me ?
I'll die like a swan .
They sing when they die .
Here it is .
Uncle , I'm coming out !
Look in on me , and talk with me , or I'll attack even without a weapon .
What's the matter ?
Look , I have a weapon , the best sword a soldier could have .
I've fought my way through obstacles twenty times more terrifying than you with this weapon .
But
who can control his fate ?
I'm not like that now .
Don't be afraid , even though you see me with a weapon .
This is the end of my journey , the end of my life .
Are you backing away in fear ?
There's no reason to be afraid .
Where would Othello go ? , Oh , look at you !
You're as pale as your nightgown !
When we meet on Judgment Day , that look of yours will send me from heaven to hell , where devils will grab me .
You're cold , cold , and you were never hot with lust .
Oh you damned villain !
Whip me , you devils , so I don't have to look at this heavenly sight !
Where is that poor rash man ?
You mean the man who used to be Othello ?
Here I am .
Where's that snake ?
Bring the villain forward .
I don't like it that you knew about this , Iago .
Damn it , you're not listening to me !
You told me you hated him .
I do hate
But that's just a fairy tale .
If you are a devil , I won't be able to kill you .
Take his sword away from him .
I'm bleeding , but you didn't kill me .
I'm not sorry , either .
I want you to live , since to me , death is happiness .
Say anything .
This poor guy's partly confessed his plan .
Did you plan Cassio's death with him ?
Yes .
Dear general , I never gave you any reason to hate me .
I believe you , and I ask you to forgive me .
Will you please make this half-devil say why he tricked me and damned my soul ?
Don't ask me anything .
You know what you know .
From this moment on , I'll never say another word .
What , not even to pray ?
Well , do your best .
This one talks about how Roderigo should kill Cassio .
Oh , you villain !
Ungodly and monstrous !
Oh , you wicked scoundrel !
Cassio , how did you get my wife's handkerchief ?
I found it in my room , and Iago just confessed that he put it there for his own purposes .
You're stripped of your power and your command , and Cassio will govern Cyprus .
As for this slave , Iago , if we can think of any torture that will hurt him a lot but keep him alive a long time , he'll have it .
You'll remain a prisoner until we bring your crimes to the Venetian government. , Okay , take him away .
But enough about that .
When you record these sad events in your letters , please describe me exactly as I am .
Don't tone things down or exaggerate them out of hostility .
If you're being fair , you'll have to describe me as someone who loved too much , but who wasn't wise about it .
Write all this
down , and then say also that in Aleppo I once saw a Turk beating a Venetian , so I grabbed the Turk by the throat and hit him like this .
Oh , what a bloody end to all this !
Everything we've heard is bad .
I was afraid this would happen , because he was a noble , brave man , but I didn't think he had a weapon .
What do you think about this change ?
They can't have changed ; there's no way this could be true .
It's a trick to confuse us .
Here's some more news coming in .
That's just what I thought .
How many , can you guess ?
Thirty ships .
Now they've turned around and are clearly heading for Cyprus .
Signor Montano , your brave and loyal servant , gives you this information and asks you to send reinforcements to relieve him .
Then it's certain they're heading for Cyprus .
Is Marcus Luccicos in town ?
No , he's in Florence .
Write to him immediately .
Hurry .
Here come Brabantio and the brave Moor .
Forgive me , your grace .
Why , what's the matter ?
It's my daughter !
Oh , my daughter !
Is she dead ?
She's dead to me .
And you yourself will determine the sentence as you see fit , and impose the death penalty if you choose to , even if the criminal were my own son .
I humbly thank you , sir .
We're sorry to hear this .
Nothing , but this is true .
There's nothing more .
I'm awkward in my speech and I'm not a smooth talker .
She blushes at the slightest thing .
The devil must be behind this .
Therefore I say again that he must have used some powerful drug or magic potion on her .
Tell us , Othello .
Or did you agree to this as equals ?
of her father .
Bring Desdemona here .
You know where she is .
In the meantime I'll tell you all , as honestly as I confess my sins to God , how I wooed this beautiful lady , and how she came to love me .
Tell us , Othello .
Her father loved me and used to invite me to his house often , continually asking me about my life and all the battles I've fought .
When I talked about all these things , Desdemona used to listen attentively .
She said she wished she hadn't heard it , but she also wished there was a man like me for her .
She thanked me and told me that if a friend of mine had a story like mine to tell , she'd fall in love with him .
I took the hint and spoke to her .
She said she loved me for the dangers I'd survived , and I loved her for feeling such strong emotions about me .
That's the only witchcraft I ever used .
Here comes my wife now .
She'll confirm everything .
I think a story like that would win my own daughter over .
Please let her speak .
If she admits she wanted this , then I won't blame Othello. , Come here , my child .
Who do you obey here ?
Father , this isn't easy for me .
I'm torn .
You're the one I have to obey .
I'm your daughter .
I'm finished , then .
Duke , please go ahead with your state business .
I'd rather adopt a child than have one of my own. , Come here , Moor .
With all my heart , I give you that thing which , if you didn't already have it , I'd try with all my heart to keep from you .
You would have made me treat them like a tyrant. , I'm done , my lord .
Let me refer to a proverb that may help you forgive these lovers : if you can't change something , don't cry about it .
Please , I'm asking you , go ahead and get back to your state affairs .
The Turks are heading for Cyprus with a powerful fleet .
She can stay at her father's house .
I won't allow it .
Neither will I .
Dear Duke , please listen to what I have to say .
What do you want to do , Desdemona ?
When I fell in love with Othello I made up my mind that I wanted to live with him .
I saw Othello's true face when I saw his mind .
Let me go with him .
Please allow her to do this .
You can decide that privately .
What's important is the urgency of this mission .
You'll have to leave tonight .
With all my heart , I'll go right away .
We'll meet again at nine in the morning .
Othello , have one of your officers stay behind to bring you your commission and whatever else is important to you .
He'll accompany my wife , and bring whatever else you think I might need .
which any peace-lover can do .
His military understanding is all theory , no practice .
And there's nothing I can do about it .
That's the curse of military service .
Now , you tell me : should I feel loyal to the Moor ?
If you don't like him you should quit .
No , calm down .
I'm serving under him to take advantage of him .
We can't all be masters , and not all masters should be followed .
Look at all the devoted servants who work for their masters their whole lives for nothing but their food , and then when they get old they're terminated .
They ought to be whipped for being so stupid .
Let me tell
All right , then .
Treat Desdemona well .
Keep an eye on her , Moor .
She lied to me , and she may lie to you .
Iago , I'm leaving my dear Desdemona with you .
Have your wife attend to her , and bring them along as soon as you can .
Come on , Desdemona , I've only got an hour of love to spend with you , to tell you what you need to do .
We're on a tight schedule .
Iago .
What do you have to say , noble friend ?
What do you think I should do ?
Go to bed , and sleep .
I'm going to go drown myself .
If you do that , I'll never respect you again .
Why , you silly man !
Oh , how stupid !
I've been alive for twenty-eight years , and I've never met a man who knew what was good for him .
I'd rather be a baboon than kill myself out of love for some woman I can't have .
What should I do ?
I know it's foolish to be so much in love , but I can't help it .
Can't help it ?
Nonsense !
What we are is up to us .
Our bodies are like gardens and our willpower is like the gardener .
Depending on what we plant , weeds or lettuce , or one kind of herb rather than a variety , the garden will either be barren and useless , or rich and productive .
If we didn't have rational minds to counterbalance our emotions and desires , our bodily urges would take over .
Thankfully , we have reason to cool our raging lusts .
I don't believe it .
You feel love because you feel lust and you have no willpower .
Come on , be a man .
Drown yourself ?
Drowning is for cats or blind puppies , don't drown yourself !
I've told you I'm your friend , and I'll stick by you .
I've never been more useful to you than I will be now .
Here's what you'll do .
Moors are moody people. , So sell your lands and raise a lot of cash .
What seems sweet to him now will soon turn bitter .
She'll have to have it .
So have your money ready .
If you want to go to hell , there are better ways to do it than killing yourself .
Raise all the money you can .
I can get the better of religion and a few flimsy vows between a misguided barbarian and a depraved Venetian girl .
And to hell with drowning yourself !
That's completely beside the point .
You can trust me .
Go now and get cash .
I told you before , and I'll tell you again and again : I hate the Moor .
So let's join forces and get revenge .
Go get money .
We'll speak again tomorrow .
Goodbye .
Where will we meet in the morning ?
At my house .
I'll be there early .
No more talk about killing yourself , okay ?
I've changed my mind about that .
Go then , goodbye .
Put a lot of cash together .
I'm going to sell all my land .
That's how I always do it , getting money from fools .
I'd be wasting my skills dealing with an idiot like that if I couldn't get something useful out of him .
I hate the Moor , and there's a widespread rumor that he's slept with my wife .
I'm not sure it's true , but just the suspicion is enough for me .
He thinks highly of me .
Cassio's a handsome man .
Let's see , how can I
get his position and use him to hurt Othello at the same time ?
How ?
How ?
Let's see .
I've worked it out .
What can you see out on the ocean ?
Nothing .
It was windy on shore too .
A big blast of wind shook our fortifications .
What do you think will be the result of this storm ?
The Turkish navy will be broken up .
The wind's whipping up the waves so high you expect them to reach the clouds and splash against the stars in the sky .
I've never seen the waters so disturbed .
If the Turkish fleet isn't protected in some harbor , their men must all be drowned .
No ship could survive this storm .
I've got news , boys , the war's over !
This terrible storm has smashed the Turks so badly that their plans are ruined .
One of our ships has reported that it saw most of their fleet shipwrecked .
What ?
Is this true ?
Michael Cassio , lieutenant of the Moor Othello , has arrived on shore .
The Moor himself is still at sea .
I'm happy about that .
He'll be a good governor .
The two of them were separated during the storm .
I hope to God Othello's all right .
Let's do that .
Every minute we expect more ships to arrive .
Thanks , you brave men who defend this island and respect Othello .
I hope heaven protects him from the weather , because I lost sight of him on the stormy sea .
Is his ship sturdy ?
Yes , it's well built , and the ship's pilot is very expert and experienced .
What's all that shouting about ?
Please go find out for certain who has arrived .
I'll do that .
Good lieutenant , is your general married ?
A man named Iago , the general's ensign .
Who's that ?
Look , the precious Desdemona has arrived on shore .
We should all kneel before her , men of Cyprus !
Greetings , my lady , and may God always be with you .
Thank you , brave Cassio .
Is there any news about my husband ?
He hasn't arrived yet .
As far as I know , he's okay and will arrive here soon .
Oh , but I'm worried .
How did you two get separated ?
The storm separated us .
Go find out the news .
you , as sure as your name's Roderigo , if I were the Moor I wouldn't want to be Iago .
I'm not who I appear to be .
Do it , and shout like the city's on fire .
Hey , Brabantio !
Signor Brabantio , hey !
Thieves !
Thieves !
Check on your daughter , your house , your money !
Thieves !
Thieves !
If she gave you as much lip as she gives me , you'd be sick of her by now .
She's always talking when I want to sleep .
I admit that in front of you , my lady , she keeps a bit quiet .
You have no reason to say that .
Come on , come on .
In your own kitchens you act like wildcats .
Shame on you , you slanderer !
No , it's true , or if it's not , I'm a villain .
You wake up to have fun , and you start work when you go to bed .
No , I don't .
But if you had to say something nice about me , what would you say ?
Don't make me do it , my lady .
I'm critical by nature .
Yes , madam .
I'm not as happy as I seem .
Come on , what would you say about me ?
Very clever !
Even if she's ugly , she'll be smart enough to find a guy to sleep with her .
This is getting worse and worse !
What if she's pretty but stupid ?
You don't know a thing !
You give your best praise to the worst women .
But how would you praise a truly good woman , someone who had no reason to worry about what anyone said about her ?
A woman who was beautiful but never proud , who could speak well but knew when to be quiet , who dressed well but was never overdressed , who had self-restraint even when she could get what she wanted , a woman who never took revenge , who overlooked it when people hurt her , who was too wise to do anything stupid , who could think without revealing her thoughts , and who could refrain from flirting with men in love with her , that kind of woman , if she ever existed , would , Would do what ?
Would raise babies and clip coupons .
Oh , that's pathetic !
Don't listen to him , Emilia , even though he's your husband .
What do you think about him , Cassio ?
Isn't he a horrible man ?
He speaks bluntly , madam .
He's more of a soldier than a wise man .
I recognize his trumpet .
Yes , it is .
Let's go greet him when he lands .
Look , here he comes .
My beautiful warrior !
My darling Othello !
I'm amazed you got here before me .
But I'm overjoyed !
If I died right now I'd be completely happy , since I'll probably never be as happy as this again in my life .
God willing , our love and our happiness will only increase as we get older .
Amen to that !
I can't talk about my happiness anymore .
It's too much .
Let's go up to the castle .
Good news , friends .
The war's over and the Turks are drowned .
How are my old friends from this island doing ? , Honey , they'll love you here in Cyprus .
And bring the ship's captain to the castle .
He's a good man. , Let's go , Desdemona .
Meet me down at the harbor. , Come here .
Lieutenant Cassio will be on guard duty tonight .
But first , I have to tell you that Desdemona's completely in love with him .
With Cassio ?
That's impossible .
Be quiet and listen to me .
Othello isn't any of those things .
Now , if that's true , and it's obviously true , who's in a better position than Cassio ?
Besides , he's young and handsome , and he's got all the qualities that naive and silly girls go for .
I can't believe that .
She's very moral .
Like hell she is !
If she were so moral , she would never have fallen in love with the Moor in the first place .
Good lord !
Did you see that ?
They were lusting after each other .
Disgusting !
But listen to me ; let me guide you .
I brought you here from Venice .
Be on guard duty tonight .
Cassio doesn't know you .
I'll be nearby .
Make Cassio angry somehow , either by speaking too loud , or insulting his military skills , or however else you want .
All right .
He's hot-tempered , and he might try to hit you with his staff .
Try to get him to do that .
To get what you want , you need to get Cassio out of the way .
I'll do it , if you help me out .
I promise I will .
Meet me in a little while at the citadel .
I need to get Othello's things from the ship .
Goodbye .
Goodbye .
I won't be satisfied until I get even with him , wife for wife .
If I can't do that , I can at least make the Moor so jealous that he can't think straight .
For besides the good news , we are also celebrating his marriage .
That's the end of the announcement .
There will be a feast from five o'clock until eleven .
God bless the island of Cyprus and our noble general Othello !
Iago's a good man .
Goodnight , Michael .
Come talk to me tomorrow as early as you can. , Come with me , my dear love .
Good night , everyone .
Hello , Iago .
It's time for us to stand guard .
The general got rid of us early tonight so he could be with Desdemona. , I can't blame him .
What's the reason for this horrible shouting ?
What's the matter ?
Sir , is everyone in your family at home ?
Are your doors locked ?
Why are you asking me that ?
For God's sake , sir , you've been robbed .
Your heart's going to break .
It's like half your soul's been ripped out .
At this very minute an old black ram is having sex with your little white lamb .
Wake up , wake up , ring a bell and wake up all the snoring citizens .
Get up , I tell you !
Are you crazy ?
Do you recognize my voice , noble lord ?
Not me .
Who are you ?
My name's Roderigo .
I told you not to hang around my house .
I've already told you quite plainly that my daughter will never marry you .
Sir , sir , sir ,
Yes , she's young and tender .
Like an invitation .
But she's modest and ladylike too .
And when she speaks , doesn't her voice stir up passion ?
She's a perfect woman , it's true .
Well , good luck to them tonight in bed !
Not tonight , Iago .
I'm not much of a drinker .
I wish there was less social pressure to drink .
Oh , but these are our friends .
Just one glass .
I'll do most of the drinking for you .
I've already had a glass of wine tonight , watered down , but look how drunk I am .
What are you talking about , man ?
Tonight is for celebrating !
Where are they ?
By the door .
Please invite them in .
I'll do it , but I don't like it .
If I can just get him to drink one more glass after what he's drunk already , he'll be as argumentative and eager to fight as a little dog .
Now I'll get Cassio to do something in front of all these drunkards that will offend everyone on the island .
Here they come .
If the future turns out as I hope it will , I'm all set for success .
My God , they've given me a lot to drink .
No , it was a little one , not more than a pint .
Bring in more wine !
My God , what a great song !
I learned it in England , where they have a talent for drinking .
The Danes , the Germans , and the Dutch , come on , drink , drink ! , are nothing compared to the English .
Are Englishmen really such heavy drinkers ?
They drink Danes under the table , and it takes them no effort at all to out-drink Germans .
Let's drink to our general !
I'll drink as much as you do !
Oh , sweet England !
God , that song's even better than the other one .
Do you want to hear it again ?
No , because we shouldn't be doing that , stuff .
Oh well , God's in charge , and some people have to go to heaven , while other people have to go to hell .
That's true , lieutenant .
Speaking for myself , and no offense to the general or anyone else , I hope I'm going to heaven .
Me too , lieutenant .
Okay , but please not before me .
The lieutenant has to get to heaven before the ensign .
But let's stop this drinking and get down to business. , God forgive our sins ! , Gentlemen , let's get down to business .
By the way , I don't want anyone thinking I'm drunk .
I'm not drunk .
I can stand well enough , and I can speak just fine .
Yes , you're speaking very well .
Yes , very well .
So don't think that I'm drunk .
It's too bad .
But is he often like this ?
He drinks like this every night before he goes to sleep .
He'd stay up all night and all day if he didn't drink himself to sleep .
The general should be informed about this .
Don't you think so ?
And it's too bad that the Moor chose a man with such a deep-rooted drinking problem as his second-in-command .
We should definitely say something to the Moor .
Well .
Now I've done a good day's work .
You must all keep up this united front .
Don't simply hide your hatred .
Swear your love for each other .
On my honor , I swear I love Rivers with all my heart .
And I love Hastings with all my heart .
Take my hand , Hastings .
Dorset , embrace Hastings. , Hastings , express your affection for the marquess of Dorset .
I swear I will never break this promise of love .
And so do I , my lord .
Now , noble Buckingham , seal this alliance by embracing my wife's friends , and make me happy in your unity .
Noble Buckingham , your promise is like medicine to my ailing heart .
And just in time , here he comes with Sir Richard Ratcliffe .
Good morning to my sovereign king and queen .
Happy indeed , the way we have spent the day .
What blessed work , my king .
I hate it and want all good men's love .
Today shall always be remembered as a holy day .
If only all struggles ended this well .
Please pardon our brother Clarence .
Why , madam , have I offered you my love only to be flouted in front of the king ?
Who doesn't know that the good duke is dead ?
Who doesn't know he's dead ?
Who says he is ?
Oh my God , what a terrible world this is !
Do I look as pale as everyone else does , Lord Dorset ?
Is Clarence dead ?
But I reversed the death sentence .
Well , the poor man died by your first order , which was carried by a winged messenger .
Some tardy cripple must have taken the counter-order , who came after Clarence was already buried .
It's clear that someone less noble , less loyal , more bloody-minded than Clarence but not a blood relation , deserves as bad an end as my brother , but he goes free .
Please be quiet .
My soul is full of sorrow .
I will not rise until your Highness hears me .
Then hurry up and tell me what you want .
That you lift the death sentence on my servant , who killed a rowdy and belligerent former servant of the duke of Norfolk .
We know you have a job to do , Brakenbury , and we'll do what you say .
Farewell , brother .
It doesn't make either of us happy , I know .
Well , your imprisonment won't last long .
I will either get you out , lying if I have to , or stay in prison in your place .
In the meantime , be patient .
I have no choice .
Goodbye .
Go walk the path that you will never return from .
I love you so much that I'll send your soul to heaven very soon , if heaven will accept anything from me , that is .
But who's coming ?
Good afternoon , my dear lord !
The same to you , my lord !
Welcome to the open air again .
How did you tolerate prison ?
But his punishment was bitter death .
Who pleaded with me to pardon
This is what happens when you act rashly .
Did you notice how the queen's guilty relatives turned pale when they heard about Clarence's death ?
Oh , they continually urged the king to do it .
God will revenge it .
But come , lords , will you come with me to Edward's room to comfort him ?
We'll come with you , your Grace .
Tell me , good grandmother , is our father dead ?
No , boy .
My pretty children , both of you misunderstand me .
So you're admitting Clarence , my father , is dead .
My uncle the king is to blame for this .
God will take revenge .
And so will I .
Quiet , children , quiet .
The king loves you very much .
Innocent sweethearts , you have no idea who's responsible for your father's death .
You think my uncle was lying , grandmother ?
Yes , boy .
I can't believe that .
What's that noise ?
I plan to fall into the blackest despair .
Why are the branches still living when the root is gone ?
Why aren't the leaves withering now that the sap is all dried up ?
If you do intend to live , then mourn .
If you're going to die , be quick about it so you can catch the king's departing soul or follow him , like obedient subjects , to his new kingdom of endless night .
Since your woes are only a portion of mine , I have every reason to surpass your lamentations and drown out your cries with my own .
I could drown the world .
My poor husband , my dear Edward !
Our poor father , Clarence !
My sons Edward and Clarence !
What support did I have other than Edward ?
And now he's gone .
What support did we have besides our father ?
And now he's gone .
And now they're both gone .
There has never been a widow who suffered such loss as me .
There have never been orphans who've suffered what we have .
There was never a mother who suffered so much loss .
Alas , I am the mother of all these others ' griefs .
She weeps for Edward and so do I , while she does not weep for Clarence , though I do .
These young children cry for Clarence and so do I , though they don't cry for Edward , as I do .
Be a careful mother , madam , and think about your son , the young prince .
Your peace of mind depends on him .
Sister , calm down .
All of us have reason to mourn the dimming of our shining star the king .
On my knee , I humbly ask your blessing .
God bless you and make you obedient , loving , and kind .
You mournful princes and grieving gentlemen who have been sharing this burden of grief , now it's time to cheer each other up with love .
Though we have lost a generous king , we are about to enjoy the benefits of a new king .
We must preserve our goodwill toward each other and not break into factions again .
I think a few members of the court should fetch the young prince from Wales and bring him to London to be crowned our king .
Why only a few courtiers , my lord of Buckingham ?
The king made peace among all of us .
And so do I. I think we all do .
So , I agree with noble Buckingham , only a few should go to meet the prince .
I think so too .
For God's sake , my lord , let's be sure to be part of the group that meets the prince .
Along the way , I'll find an opportunity to separate him from the queen's proud relatives , as step one in the plan we've discussed .
You are my other self , my oracle , my prophet , my dear brother !
Good morrow , neighbor , whither away so fast ?
I'm telling you , I hardly know myself .
Did you hear the news that's going around ?
Yes , that the king is dead .
Neighbors , hello .
Good day to you , sir .
Is it true that good King Edward has died ?
Yes , sir , it's all too true , God help us .
Then , gentlemen , we can count on trouble .
No , no , with God's help , his son will be king .
It's bad news when a country is ruled by a child .
His counselors will govern as long as he's a minor , and then he'll take over .
With patience , noble lord , as prisoners must .
It's a shame that we eagles are caged up while the vultures are free to do whatever they please .
What's the news abroad ?
Very sad .
Where is he , in his bed ?
He is .
You go ahead , and I will follow you .
That's how it was with Henry the Sixth , who was crowned in Paris when he was only nine months old .
Really ?
It would be better if they were all on his father's side , or that there were none at all on his father's side .
Richard , the duke of Gloucester , is very dangerous , and the queen's sons and brothers are haughty and proud , it would be better for this ailing country if they were subjects , not rulers .
Come , come , we're worrying about the worst-case scenario .
I'm sure everything will be fine .
When storms arrive early , you can expect the harvest will be damaged .
So , if all turns out fine , as you say , it's more than we deserve or I expect .
It's always like this in times of change .
But leave it all to God .
Where are you all off to ?
The court has sent for us .
They'll be here tomorrow or the next day .
I'm dying to see the prince .
I hope he's grown a lot since I last saw him .
Yes , mother , but I wish I hadn't .
Why , dear child ?
It's good to grow .
Yes , " said my uncle Gloucester , "Small plants are graceful , while ugly weeds grow fast." And since then , I've wished I wouldn't grow so fast , because sweet flowers are slow while the weeds grow in a hurry .
Well , it certainly wasn't true for Richard !
As a child , he took such a long time to grow up that , according to his rule , he should have grown up into a gracious adult .
And no doubt he is , gracious madam .
I hope he is , but mothers get to have their doubts .
Hey , if I'd remembered something about him , I could have had a good comeback for my uncle , touching on his growth worse than he touched on mine .
What would you have said , my young York ?
Do tell .
Indeed , they say my uncle grew so fast that he could gnaw on a crust of bread when he was two hours old .
It took me two years before I had a single tooth .
Grandmother , this would have been a biting joke .
Pretty York , who told you about his teeth ?
His nurse , grandmother .
His nurse ?
Why , she was dead before you were even born .
Well , if it wasn't her , I don't know .
A mischievous child .
Come , come , you are too clever for your own good .
Good lady , don't be angry with the child .
Little pitchers have big ears .
Here comes a messenger .
What's the news ?
My lord , it's news I wish I didn't have to report .
How's the prince ?
He's fine and healthy , madam .
What is your news ?
The powerful dukes Gloucester and Buckingham .
What did they do wrong ?
I've told you everything I know .
Why the nobles were imprisoned , and on what charges , I don't know , my gracious lord .
Oh no !
I see the downfall of my family .
Welcome , destruction , blood , and massacre !
My husband lost his life to get the crown , and my sons ' fortunes have been tossed up and down , leaving me to rejoice over their victories and weep over their losses .
Let it end , or let me die so I won't have to watch any more of it .
The tiring journey seems to have made you gloomy .
It wasn't the journey itself , uncle , but the troubles we encountered that made it wearisome and dull .
I want more uncles here to welcome me .
Those uncles that you wish were here were dangerous .
Your Grace heard their saccharine words , but didn't take note of their poisonous intentions .
God protect you from them and from other false friends !
God should keep me from false friends , but they weren't false .
My lord , the mayor of London is here to greet you .
God bless your Grace with health and happy days .
And what a slug Hastings is that he hasn't even arrived to tell us whether they're coming !
And , just in time , here comes the sweaty lord .
Welcome , my lord .
What , isn't my mother coming ?
God knows why , but your mother and your brother have taken sanctuary in Westminster Abbey .
Your sweet brother wanted to come meet you , but his mother wouldn't let him .
I wouldn't commit so serious a crime for anything .
In these less dainty times , you're not breaking the laws of sanctuary to seize him .
The prince has done neither ; therefore , in my opinion , he isn't really protected by sanctuary .
Often I have heard of "sanctuary men , " but until now I've never heard of "sanctuary children." My lord , you've won me over this time .
Lord Hastings , will you go with me ?
I'm coming , my lord .
Go as fast as you can .
Say , uncle Richard , if my brother comes , where will I stay till my coronation ?
Whatever seems best to you .
Of all places , I don't like the
He started it , my noble lord , and succeeding generations rebuilt it .
Is it on record that he built it , or is it just word of mouth ?
On record , my gracious lord .
Well , I think that even if it weren't on record , the truth would be remembered from one generation to the next , all the way to Doomsday .
What did you say , uncle ?
Death didn't conquer
The king won't live , I hope .
I'll marry the earl of Warwick's youngest daughter , Lady Anne .
So what if I killed her husband and her father ?
So that's what I'll do , not because I love her but because I'll get something out of it .
But I'm running ahead of myself .
Clarence is still alive ; Edward is not only alive , he's king .
Only when they're dead can I start to count my gains .
What , my dear lord ?
Richard of York , how are you doing , my loving brother ?
Very well , my supreme lord , that's what I have to call you now .
How's my nephew doing , noble lord of York ?
Thank you for asking , uncle .
Oh , my lord , you once said that lazy weeds grow fast .
The prince has far outgrown me .
He has , my lord .
Does that mean he's lazy ?
Oh , my handsome nephew , I must not say that .
In that case , he's more obliged to you than I am .
He may command me as my king , but you still have power over me as a relative .
Uncle , please give me your dagger .
My dagger , little nephew ?
With all my heart .
Are you begging , brother ?
From my kind uncle , who I know will give it to me , especially as it's not worth much .
I'll give you a greater gift than that , nephew .
A greater gift ?
That must mean a sword .
Yes , gentle cousin , if it were light enough for you .
Oh , I see , you will only part with lightweight presents .
For more important things , you'll say no .
A sword's too heavy for you to wear .
I wouldn't think much of it even if it were heavier .
What's that ?
But , uncle , you know how to bear with him .
You mean , to bear me , not to bear My protector , Richard , insists on it .
I can't sleep quietly in the Tower .
Why , what are you afraid of ?
My uncle Clarence's angry ghost .
My grandmother told me he was murdered there .
I'm not afraid of dead uncles .
Nor living ones , I hope .
Well , I hope not .
No doubt , no doubt .
Oh , he's a dangerously clever boy , bold , quick-witted , capable .
He's his mother's child from head to toe .
Well , enough about them. , Come here , Catesby .
Hastings loved the prince's father so much that we won't be able to persuade him to do anything against the prince .
What about Stanley ?
Won't he join us ?
He'll do whatever Hastings does .
Okay , just do this , noble Catesby : sound out Lord Hastings , but make it seem as if you're just mulling over the idea , that it hasn't been firmed up yet .
If he seems game to our plan , encourage him to join us and explain all our reasons .
But if he's resistant and chilly , then be like that too and break off the conversation .
Give my regards to Hastings , Catesby .
My good lords , I plan to .
Will we hear from you before bedtime , Catesby ?
You will , my lord .
You'll find us both at Crosby Place .
Now , my lord , what are we going to do if we find that Lord Hastings won't go along with our plans ?
Chop off his head .
Whatever we decide to do .
And when I'm king , remember to ask me for the earldom of Hereford and all the possessions that go with it , which my brother the king used to own .
I look forward to that present .
You'll find I'll give it to you very willingly .
Come , let's have an early dinner so that we have time to work out our plans .
A messenger from Lord Stanley .
Four o'clock in the morning .
Can't Lord Stanley sleep ?
I guess not , for good reason , as you'll soon hear .
First , he sends his regards .
And then ?
Besides that , he says that two meetings are going to be held tomorrow , and something may be decided at one of them that may make you and him , who are at the other , sorry .
While he and I are at one , my loyal servant Catesby will be at the other , so nothing will happen that we won't find out about .
Tell your master there is no sound basis for his worries .
And as for his dreams , I'm surprised he's so foolish as to trust the fantasies of a restless night .
If we flee from the boar before the boar even pursues us , we'll only make the boar angry and suspicious , causing him to chase us when he never intended to .
Good morning , my noble lord .
Good day , Catesby .
You're up early .
What news can you tell me in this fast-moving , unsteady state of ours ?
I believe it won't stop moving and stand upright till Richard wears the wreath of the realm .
What do you mean , "wears the wreath" ?
Are you talking about the crown ?
Yes , my good lord .
I'll have my head cut from my shoulders before I'll see the crown so misplaced .
But do you think that's what he's aiming for ?
For that reason he sends you this good news , that this very day your enemies , the queen's relatives , will die at Pomfret .
Well , I'm not sorry to hear that , because they have always been my enemies .
Well , let's hope you stay in that noble frame of mind .
But as for now , before two weeks have gone by , I'm going to send some people packing .
It's a horrible thing to die when you're not prepared for it , my gracious lord .
Yes , monstrous , monstrous !
That's how it will be for some other men , too , who think they're as safe as you and I , who are well-loved by noble Richard and Buckingham .
I know they do , and I certainly deserve it .
You're afraid of the boar but you go around without your spear ?
My lord , good morning .
Good morning , Catesby .
My lord , my life is as important to me as yours is to you , and it was never as precious to me as it is now .
Do you think I would be feeling as triumphant as I am if I didn't know that our situation was secure ?
I hope to God I'm proven wrong !
Well , should we head to the Tower ?
The day is well on its way .
Set down your honorable load , men , if there is ever any honor in being dead .
You know what , my lord ?
Those men you just mentioned will be beheaded today .
They deserved to keep their heads more than some people who have managed to keep their positions .
But come , my lord , let's go .
Go on ahead .
I'll talk with this good man .
What's up , man ?
How's it going ?
Better , since your lordship was nice enough to ask .
I tell you , man , it's better for me , too , than the last time we met here .
But now , I tell you , keep it to yourself , though , those enemies of mine are being put to death today , and I'm better than I've ever been .
Well , let's hope your good fortune continues !
Here , drink to me .
God be good to you !
A nice coincidence , my lord .
I'm glad to see you .
I thank you , Sir John , with all my heart .
I am indebted to you for your last sermon .
By next week , I'll be able to pay you .
Your friends at Pomfret , they're the ones who need a priest .
When I ran into this holy man , those men you mentioned did come to mind , in fact .
Are you headed to the Tower ?
I'll be off before you are .
Yes , probably , because I'm staying for lunch .
I'll follow you , my lord .
Hurry up .
Your lives are over .
Oh , Pomfret , Pomfret !
Oh , you bloody prison , fatal and threatening to noble lords !
Now Margaret's curse has fallen on our heads , for standing by and doing nothing when Richard stabbed her son .
She cursed Hastings then .
Oh God , remember to hear her prayer for them , just as for us !
But don't kill my sister and her royal sons , be satisfied , dear God , with our blood , which is being spilled unjustly , as you know .
Hurry up .
The hour of death is approaching .
Come , Grey .
Come , Vaughan .
Let's embrace
In God's name , speak .
When should the royal day be ?
Is everything ready for that event ?
It is .
Tomorrow's a good day .
Who knows what the Lord Protector thinks ?
Who's closest to him ?
You , I think , would best know what he's thinking .
We know each other's faces , but as for our thoughts , he doesn't know any more about my thinking than I do about yours or his , or you do about mine .
Lord Hastings , you and he are close .
Thank you .
I know he holds me dear , but I haven't asked him about the coronation , and he hasn't told me .
But you , my noble lords , may name a time , and I'll second it on the duke's behalf , which I don't think he'll mind .
Right on cue , here's the duke himself .
My noble lords and relatives , good morning .
If you hadn't shown up on cue , my lord , Lord Hastings was going to take your part , I mean , he was going to speak for you , in the crowning of the king .
No one may be bolder than my Lord Hastings .
Buckingham , I need to have a word with you .
I'll come soon .
We have not yet set the coronation day .
Where is my lord , the duke of Gloucester ?
I have sent for the strawberries .
Richard is looking cheerful today .
You always know he's got some plan that pleases him when he says good morning with such gusto .
I don't think there's a man under the sun who's worse at hiding his love or hate than Richard .
I pray to God he isn't .
Then see the evidence of their evil with your own eyes .
If they have done this thing , my noble lord , If ?
You lover of that damned whore , you're talking to me of "ifs" ?
You're a traitor. , Off with his head .
I pity England , but not myself .
Stanley dreamed the boar beheaded him , and I laughed and refused to flee with him .
Three times today my horse stumbled and started when he looked in the direction of the Tower , as if he hated to carry me to this slaughterhouse .
Oh , now I really need that priest who spoke to me today !
And I regret having bragged to the messenger about how my enemies were being butchered at Pomfret while I , as I said , was in good standing with Richard .
Oh Margaret , Margaret , your heavy curse has now landed on poor Hastings's miserable head !
Make your confession short .
He's eager to see your head .
We spend more time seeking out the fleeting glories of this temporary world than looking to the permanent grace of God !
Anyone who builds his hopes on air lives like a drunken sailor hanging on a mast , ready with every dizzy nod of his head to tumble to the bottom of the sea .
Come , come , hurry up .
It's pointless to talk now .
Oh bloody Richard !
Miserable England , I foresee for you the most frightening time you have ever experienced. , Come , lead me to the block .
Bring him my head .
Those who smile at it will soon be dead themselves .
Frightening looks are also at my service , as are fake smiles .
But has Catesby gone ?
A drum !
And if he ever has a wife , let her be more miserable when he dies than I am now .
What wicked magician has conjured up this devil to interrupt this sacred burial rite ?
Lord Mayor , the reason we have sent , Look behind you !
Defend yourself !
There are enemies here .
God defend and guard us innocents against them !
Stay calm .
They're friends , Ratcliffe and Lovell .
Here's the head of that notorious traitor , the dangerous and unsuspected Hastings .
I loved this man so much it makes me weep .
He was so slick in covering over his plans that if it hadn't been for his love affair with Shore's wife , I would never have suspected him .
He would have ?
What , do you think we're Turks or savages , instead of Christians ?
I didn't expect any better from him once he got involved with Mistress Shore .
But , my good lord , the words of you and Lord Buckingham are as trustworthy to me as if I had seen and heard him speak myself .
That is exactly why we wanted you here , your lordship , to avoid the public carping and complaints .
There was no limit to what his lustful eye and savage heart would prey on .
And , if you need to , approach the subject of me : tell them that when my mother became pregnant with the insatiable Edward , my noble father was fighting in France .
But only hint at this vaguely , because , as you know , my mother's still alive .
Goodbye , my lord .
If things go well , bring the crowd to I'm off .
Around three or four o'clock , look for news from the meeting hall .
Lovell , go as fast as you can to Doctor Shaw .
Now I'll go inside and write out a secret order to keep Clarence's brats out of sight and to forbid anyone whatsoever from seeing King Edward's sons .
What a backward world we live in !
Why , who's so stupid that he can't see through this fraud ?
The world is a bad place , where you can't speak what you know .
It's incredible , they didn't say a word .
Did you mention that Edward's children are bastards ?
I did .
He said that the people weren't used to being spoken to except by the What blocks of wood !
They wouldn't say anything ?
Aren't the mayor and his fellow citizens coming ?
The mayor is here at hand .
And make sure to carry a prayer book in your hand and to stand between two priests , okay ?
But don't be easily won over .
I'm going now .
If you're as good at pleading to them as I am at saying no to you , this will definitely come to a happy end .
Hurry , go up to the roof .
The Lord Mayor is knocking .
Welcome , my lord .
I don't think he wants to be disturbed .
Now , Catesby , what does your lord say to my request ?
My lord , he asks that you please visit him tomorrow or the next day .
Return to the gracious duke , good Catesby .
Tell him that the mayor , some citizens , and I have come to confer with his grace in matters of great importance concerning the general good .
I'll tell him right away , my lord .
Ah , my lord , this prince is nothing like Edward !
He's not sleeping to fatten up his lazy body , but praying , to nourish his attentive soul .
England would be lucky to have this virtuous prince as king .
But I'm afraid we'll never get him to agree to be king .
But God forbid he says no to us !
I'm afraid he will .
Here comes Catesby again .
What's up , Catesby , what does your master say ?
My lord , he wonders why you have assembled such troops of citizens to speak with him , since he had no idea they were coming .
My lord , he's afraid you mean him harm .
I'm sorry my noble brother is suspicious of me .
When devoutly religious men are praying , it's hard to draw them out of it , because they get lost in the wonder of their contemplation .
See how he stands between two clergymen !
My lord , you don't need to apologize .
I beg you to pardon me .
I suspect that I have committed some offence to the city and you have come to reprimand me for not knowing better .
You have , my lord .
Sweet saint , for goodness's sake , don't be so angry .
If you enjoy looking at your awful deeds , take a look at this noteworthy example of your butcheries .
It's your presence that draws out this blood from his empty veins .
Oh earth , which soaks up this blood , revenge his death !
Either let heaven send lightning to strike the murderer dead or let the earth open wide and devour him , as it does this good king's blood .
If I don't answer , perhaps you'll think I'm accepting the heavy responsibility you foolishly want to impose on me .
First of all , even if all the obstacles were eliminated and my path led straight to the crown , if it were truly my birthright , I would rather hide from my greatness than hide inside the greatness of the position itself and be smothered by it .
So , thank God , there is no real need for me , as I wouldn't be able to help you much .
The royal tree has left us other fruit , which , with time , will do just fine on the throne and make us all happy as king , I'm sure .
God forbid that I snatch the crown from him .
King Edward was going to marry Lady Lucy , your mother can vouch for that , and then he was betrothed to Bona , the King of France's sister-in-law .
But both of these were put off by Elizabeth Grey , a careworn mother of many children who had once been a beauty but was now a stressed-out widow long past her prime .
Don't refuse the love we offer you .
Oh , make them joyful !
Grant their law-abiding request !
Alas , why would you heap all these responsibilities on me ?
I am unfit to rule and to be king .
Please , don't take it badly , but I can not and will not give in to you .
But listen , if
Oh , please don't swear , my lord of Buckingham .
If you refuse it , the whole country will regret it .
Would you tie me to a whole world of worries ?
Well , call them back again .
I am not made of stone ; I am affected by all these kind pleas , though it goes against my conscience and my soul .
God bless your Grace !
We understand you're just doing it for us , and we'll be sure to say so .
If you say that , you'll only be telling the truth .
Then I salute you with this royal title : long live Richard , England's worthy king !
Amen .
Will you be crowned tomorrow ?
Whenever you want , since you're the one who wants it .
Who's this ?
My granddaughter , with her kind aunt , the duchess of Gloucester , leading her by the hand ?
Now , on my life , the young child must be headed to the Tower to greet the young princes , whom she adores .
Where are you going ?
Just to the Tower , I'm guessing , for the same reason you are : to salute the noble princes who are staying there .
Yes , kind sister .
We can all go together .
And here comes the warden , just in time .
They're just fine , my dear madam .
But I'm sorry , I'm not allowed to let you visit them .
The king has strictly forbidden it .
The king ?
Who's that ?
I meant to say the Lord Protector .
The Lord keep him from the title of king !
Richard has set boundaries between my love and theirs ?
I am their mother .
Who's going to keep me from them ?
I am their father's mother .
I will see them .
I am their aunt , and I love them like a mother .
So take me to see them .
Officer , I'll take the responsibility from you , and the blame too .
No , madam , no .
I can't do this .
I am bound by oath , so please forgive me .
In just an hour from now , Duchess of York , I'll be saluting you as the mother of two beautiful queens .
Oh , cut my bodice-staps so that my pent-up heart can have some room to breathe , or I'll faint from this deadly news !
Cruel , cruel news !
Your mother's name has become a threat to her own children .
I'll write to my stepson Richmond on your behalf , so that he'll meet you on the way .
But don't delay .
O , this evil wind that spreads nothing but misery .
It has hatched a I go unwillingly .
I wish to God that the golden crown that I'll have to wear were red-hot steel and burned me straight through to the brain !
If you want to make me happy , don't wish yourself harm .
No ?
Why ?
Every night I'm awakened by his Poor dear , goodbye .
I pity your situation .
No more than I do yours .
Goodbye .
You are a rude , ragged nurse and an old , sullen playmate for such tender princes .
Please treat my babies well .
Dear woman , you don't know the rules of charity .
Villain , you don't know the laws of God or of man .
Even the fiercest wild animal has some touch of pity .
If I know nothing about pity , that must mean I'm not an animal .
It's even stranger when an angel is so angry .
Divine , perfect woman , give me a chance to prove in detail that I'm innocent of the evils you accuse me of .
Contagious infection of humanity , give me a chance to condemn you for the evils I know you've committed .
You who are beautiful beyond words , calm down and let me explain myself .
You who are wicked beyond belief , the only "explanation" I'll accept from you is for you to hang yourself .
Such an expression of despair would only prove that I was guilty .
My gracious king .
Give me your hand .
Because of your advice and your help , I have a high position now .
But will I wear these honors for only a day or will I enjoy them for a long time ?
Let them last forever .
Oh Buckingham , now I'm going to test to see if you're truly made of gold .
Young Prince Edward is still alive , what do you think I'm going to say next ?
Go on , my loving lord .
Ha !
But Edward is still alive .
True , noble prince .
Oh , how bitter it is that Edward , the real "true , noble prince" , should still be alive !
Cousin , you didn't used to be so thickheaded .
Shall I put it plainly ?
What do you say ?
Your Grace can do whatever he wants .
Tut , tut , you've become rather icy .
Tell me , do I have your consent to kill them ?
Give me a little breathing space , my lord , a little pause to think .
I'll let you know my answer shortly .
My lord ?
Do you know anyone who would kill someone for money ?
What's his name ?
His name is Tyrrel , my lord .
I know the man a bit .
Go , bring him here , boy .
Look who's here !
What's the news with you ?
You should know , my loving lord , I've heard that the marquess Dorset has fled to Brittany , to the earl of Richmond .
Come here , Catesby .
Spread the rumor abroad that Anne , my wife , is very sick .
And find a poverty stricken gentleman who I can marry straightaway to Clarence's daughter .
Look at you , standing there in a stupor !
I repeat , spread the rumor that Anne , my wife , is sick and likely to die .
Are you Tyrrel ?
James Tyrrel , and your most obedient subject .
Are you indeed ?
Do you dare kill a friend of mine ?
Well , that's what you get to do .
Two great enemies , in fact , enemies to my peace of mind .
Tyrrel , I mean those bastards in the Tower .
Give me access to them , and soon you won't have to worry about them anymore .
That's music to my ears .
Come here , Tyrrel .
By this token , you'll be admitted to their cell .
Get up and listen to me .
That's all there is to it .
As soon as the deed is done , you will be in my favor and I will promote you .
I'll do it right away .
My lord , I have thought over the request you just made of me .
Well , it doesn't matter anymore .
Dorset has fled to the earl of Richmond .
I heard the news , my lord .
Stanley , Richmond is your wife's son .
Get information from her .
My lord , I'd want to have the gift you promised me on your honor : the earldom of Hereford and all the possessions that go with it .
Stanley , pay attention to your wife's doings .
If she sends any letters to Richmond , you will be accountable to me for it .
What do you say , your Highness , about my just request ?
As I remember , Henry the Sixth prophesied that Richmond would be king when Richmond was only a foolish little boy .
A king , perhaps , My lord , How is it that the prophet didn't tell me at the time that I would kill him ?
My lord , your promise of the earldom , Richmond !
The last time I was in Exeter , the mayor kindly showed me the castle there and called it " My lord !
Yes , what time is it ?
I'm reminding your grace what you promised me .
Well , but what time is it ?
It's almost ten o'clock .
Well , let it strike ten then .
Why "let it strike" ?
Because you're like the lowborn fellow who strikes the bell , you keep interrupting my thoughts .
I am not in the giving mood today .
You're bothering me .
I'm not in the mood .
Is this really happening ?
Does he reward my dedicated service with such deep contempt ?
Did I work to make him king for this ?
Oh , let me remember what happened to Hastings and hurry to
It was the most ruthless massacre this country has ever been guilty of .
Dighton and Forrest , whom I hired to perform the butchery , are used to killing people , the bloody dogs .
Their lips , like four red roses on a stalk , touched .
Kind Tyrrel , will your news make me happy ?
If my doing what you told me to makes you happy , then be happy , because I did it .
But did you see them dead ?
I did , my lord .
And buried , noble Tyrrel ?
The Tower's chaplain has buried them , but to tell you the truth , I don't know where .
Tyrrel , come back shortly after dinner and tell me the details of their deaths .
In the meantime , think about how I can do you good and give you what you want .
See you soon .
I humbly say goodbye .
Edward's sons have been carried off by the angels and Anne , my wife , has bid good night to the world .
Now I go , a jolly , thriving wooer , to marry my brother Edward's young daughter , Elizabeth , because I know Richmond has his eye on her .
My lord !
Is the news good or bad that you enter without knocking ?
Bad news , my lord .
The Bishop of Ely has fled to Richmond , and Buckingham , backed by a hardy Welsh army , is on the march .
Ely joining Richmond troubles me more than Buckingham and his quickly assembled army .
Let's say I didn't kill them .
Then you might as well say they're not dead .
But they are dead , and you killed them , you slave of the devil .
I did not kill your husband .
Well , then he must be alive .
You're lying .
Queen Margaret saw your sword steaming with his blood .
She provoked me with her lying mouth , accusing me of crimes I didn't commit .
No , what provoked you was your own bloody mind , which never thinks about anything but butchering .
You killed this king , didn't you ?
Yes , I'll grant you that .
You'll grant me , you hedgehog ?
Then let God grant me that you'll be damned for that wicked deed .
Oh , he was gentle , mild , and virtuous .
That will please God , who has him now .
He is in heaven , where you will never go .
Let him thank me , who helped him get there .
I've lurked in the shadows here to watch the downfall of my enemies .
I'll head to France soon .
It's time to hide , wretched Margaret .
Who's coming ?
Ah , my poor princes !
If your gentle souls are still flying in the air and have not yet landed where they will remain forever , hover around me with your airy wings and hear your mother's lament .
Hover about her and tell her she got what she deserved , with her children dead before their time .
I've been crazed with so many miseries that my tongue has tired of lamenting and gone mute .
Edward Plantagenet , why are you dead ?
Will you abandon such gentle lambs , God , and throw them to the wolves ?
Have you ever slept before while such a terrible deed was done ?
Let my sorrow have the upper hand .
You had a Clarence , too , and Richard killed him .
Oh righteous God , how can I thank you enough that this meat-eating mutt preys on his mother's children and forces her to join others in their grief !
O Harry's wife , do not triumph in my sorrow !
With God as my witness , I swear I have wept for yours .
Your son Edward , who stabbed my son Edward , is dead .
Your Clarence , who stabbed my Edward , is also dead .
Richard , a fiendish spy for hell itself , still lives , but only long enough to buy souls to send below .
I pray that God ends his life before I die , so I can say , "The dog is dead ! "
Oh , you prophesied that the time would come when I would want your help in cursing that humpbacked spider , that hideous toad !
Back then , I called you "a poor , imitation queen , " a badly reproduced copy of what I was , a pretty prologue for the tragedy that was about to follow , a woman who was lifted high only to be hurled down to hell , a mother only teased with two beautiful children , who would soon die .
And I was right , because where's your husband now ?
Your brothers ?
Your two sons ?
Now you have only the memory of what you were , which tortures you when you consider what you've become .
You once stole my position ; now you get to have the grief that goes with it .
Your English sorrows will make me smile in France .
You who are so skilled in cursing , stay awhile and teach me how to curse my enemies .
Remember your children as being sweeter than they actually were , and think of the man who killed them as worse than he is .
Making your loss greater makes the person who caused it worse .
Think like this all day , and you'll learn how to curse .
My words are dull .
Enliven them with yours !
Your misery will make them sharp and piercing like mine .
But give words a chance .
If that's true , then don't be tongue-tied .
Come with me , and let's smother my fiendish son , who smothered your two sweet sons , in bitter words .
Who's blocking the way ?
The woman who might have blocked you from all the murders you've committed by strangling you in her cursed womb .
Are you hiding your forehead with a golden crown , when , if there was any justice in this world , it should be branded with the murders you committed , your slaughter of the prince who held that crown , and of my sons and my brothers ?
Tell me , you villainous lowlife , where are my children ?
Where are the noble Hastings , Rivers , Vaughan , Grey ?
Where is kind Hastings ?
Play , trumpets !
Don't let the heavens hear these chattery women abuse the Lord's anointed king .
Play , I say !
Either be calm and polite or I'll drown you out with the music of war .
Are you my son ?
Yes , I thank God , my father , and yourself .
Then patiently listen to my impatience .
Madam , I'm a bit like you in that I can't tolerate a tone of disapproval .
Oh , let me speak !
Go ahead , but I won't listen .
I'll be gentle and mild .
And brief , good mother , I'm in a hurry .
Are you that impatient ?
God knows I waited for you in anguish , pain , and agony when I gave birth to you .
And didn't I finally arrive to comfort you ?
So , what hour of comfort have I ever had in your company ?
Name one .
You're too bitter .
Just listen this once .
I'll never speak to you again .
So be it .
Though I have far more reason , I don't have as much energy to curse you .
But I say amen to everything she said .
Wait , madam .
I need to speak a word with you .
I have no more royal sons for you to murder .
You have a daughter named Elizabeth , who is virtuous and beautiful , aristocratic and full of grace .
And does she have to die for this ?
Oh , let her live , and I'll ruin her manners and her beauty .
So that she may live , I'll say I cheated on Edward and that she is not really his child .
Don't wrong her birth .
She has royal blood .
To save her life , I'll say she doesn't .
Yes , as safe as her brothers ' lives were .
Bad friends were .
My children would have enjoyed a better death if God had blessed you with a purer life .
Whichever hand literally stabbed their tender hearts , you're the one who gave the order .
No doubt the murderous knife was blunt till it was sharpened on your stony heart , you reveled in my lambs ' bloody guts .
But constant expression of wild grief will only make it tame , so I'm not going to say any more about my boys until I've gouged your eyes out with my bare hands .
Madam , if I do as well as I think I'm going to do in these dangerous , violent wars , you and your relatives will have more good at my hands than you've ever had bad !
What good does heaven have in store that can do me any good now ?
The advancement of your children , noble lady .
Advancement to some scaffold , to lose their heads .
No , advancement to the dignity and height of honor , to a high , imperial kind of glory .
And you're not suited for any place except hell .
Yes , and one other place , if you'll only let me name it .
Some dungeon .
Your bedroom .
There is no rest to be had in any bedroom where you are !
Exactly , madam , until I sleep with you .
Well , explain , but do it fast so that your puny store of kindness isn't used up by talking about it .
Then know that from my soul I love your daughter .
I believe it .
What do you believe ?
That you love my daughter to spite your soul .
Don't be so quick to twist my meaning .
The one who makes her queen , of course .
Who else should it be ?
What , you ?
What do you think , madam ?
How would you woo her ?
And Madam , with all my heart .
Come , come , you're making fun of me .
This is not the way to win your daughter .
There isn't any other way , unless you took on another form and became someone else .
But suppose I did all the things you named out of love for her .
Then she has no choice but to hate you , as you purchased her love with murder .
Whatever has already been done can't be undone now .
Men act imprudently sometimes , then realize their mistakes when they have time to think about them .
If I took the kingdom from your sons , I'll give it to your daughter to make up for it .
If I have killed your children , I will have children with your daughter .
A grandmother is loved hardly less than a mother is .
Your children caused you trouble in your youth , but mine will bring you comfort in your old age .
I can't make up for everything that I'd like to , so accept such kindness as I can offer .
Indeed , we have many good days to look forward to !
Go , then , mother , to your daughter .
What should I say to her ?
That her father's brother wants to be her husband ?
Or should I say it's her uncle ?
Or should I describe you as the one who killed her brothers and her uncles ?
How can I describe you that will make you appeal to the young woman and will also agree with God , the law , my honor , and her feelings ?
Claim fair England's peace depends on this alliance .
She will purchase that peace with an everlasting war .
Tell her that the king , who has the power to command people , asks her .
He asks her to do what God Say she will be a high and mighty queen .
Only to watch that title become worthless , as her mother has .
Say I will love her everlastingly .
But how long will "ever" last ?
Until her beautiful life's end .
But how long will her beautiful life last ?
As long as heaven and nature extend it .
As long as hell and Richard want it .
Tell her that I , her king , am her lowly subject .
But she , your subject , hates such a king .
Be eloquent on my behalf .
An honest tale succeeds best when it is told simply .
Then tell her my loving story in simple terms .
You can't tell a story simply when it's a lie .
Your answers are too shallow and too hasty .
Oh no , my reasons are deep and as permanent as death .
Don't harp on that point , madam , it's past .
I will harp on it till my heartstrings break .
Now , by St. George , my knighthood , and my crown , The first you profaned , the second you dishonored , and the third you stole .
I swear , By nothing , because this is no oath .
St. George loses his holiness once Then , by myself , You've misused yourself .
Now , by the world , It's full of your ugly wrongdoings .
By my father's death , Your life has dishonored his death .
If you had been afraid to break an oath with him , the crown you are currently wearing would have graced the head of my child , and both princes would still be alive , not preyed on by worms .
What can you swear by now ?
By the future .
There are parents living whose children you have butchered ; they are now old withered plants who will moan over their losses as they grow old .
Don't swear by the future , because you've ruined it before it has even arrived .
May I only do well in these dangerous battles if my intention to repent and prosper is sincere !
Let me destroy myself , let heaven and destiny deprive me of happy hours , let day remain dark and night sleepless , and let me have nothing but terrible luck if I do not love with a pure heart , clean devotion , and holy thoughts your beautiful royal daughter .
My happiness and yours lie in her .
It
Shall I be tempted by the devil ?
Yes , if the devil tempts you to do good .
Yes , if your memories do you no good .
Yet you killed my children .
But in your daughter's womb I will bury them .
Should I go convince my daughter to marry you ?
And be a happy mother by doing so .
I'm going .
Write to me very soon and I'll let you know what she thinks .
Many former friends of ours have gathered to meet the fleet and aren't willing to beat it back .
Word is that Richmond is the navy's admiral .
Someone who can ride fast , go to the duke of Here , my good lord .
Catesby , fly to the duke .
I will my lord , as fast as I can .
Ratcliffe , come here .
Ride to Salisbury .
Oh , right , good Catesby .
Tell him to gather together the greatest army he can muster in a hurry and meet me right away at Salisbury .
I'm off .
What would you like me to do at Salisbury ?
Why , what is there to do before I get there ?
Your Highness just told me that I should ride there before you .
I changed my mind .
Stanley , what news do you have ?
Nothing that you want to hear , my lord , but nothing so bad that I can't mention it .
Well , how nice , a riddle !
Neither good nor bad .
Why do you go around in circles when you could get to the point ?
Once again , what's the news ?
Richmond is sailing on the sea .
Let him sink there so the sea will cover him !
Lily-livered coward , what's he doing there ?
Well , what do you guess ?
That , stirred up by Dorset , Buckingham , and Morton , he's coming to England to claim the crown .
They are my daylight , my life .
Then I hope night shadows your day , and death takes your life !
Don't damn yourself .
I wish I were , so I could deprive you of both day and life .
There is no better one on earth .
Is the throne empty ?
Is the army without a leader ?
Is the king dead , the empire dispossessed ?
What heir of the York family is there alive other than myself ?
And who is England's king but an heir of the great York ?
Therefore , tell me , what is he doing at sea ?
Where is your army , then , to beat him back ?
Where are your tenants and your followers ?
Aren't they at this very moment on the western shore helping the rebels land safely from their ships ?
Then they're cold friends to me .
What are they doing in the north when they should be in the west serving their king ?
They haven't been commanded to go to the west , mighty king .
If your Majesty would like , I'll muster up my friends and meet you wherever and whenever you like .
Most mighty sovereign , you have no reason to doubt my friendship .
I was never disloyal , and I never will be .
Then go gather your men , but leave behind your son , George Stanley .
My noble king , my friends have informed me that Sir Edward Courtney and his brother , the haughty Bishop of Exeter , are now in My king , the Guildfords in My lord , the duke of Buckingham's army , Enough , you
The news I have to tell your majesty is that Buckingham's army has dispersed from sudden floods and heavy rainfall .
Buckingham himself has wandered away alone to who knows where .
I beg your pardon .
Yes , your Highness .
Even if we don't fight foreign enemies , we'll beat down these rebels at home .
While we're talking here , a royal battle could be won and lost .
Someone deliver the order that Buckingham be brought to Salisbury .
Everyone else , march on with me .
But , tell me , where is the noble Richmond now ?
At Pembroke , or at Harfordwest in Wales .
Sir Walter Herbert , a renowned soldier ; Sir Gilbert Talbot ; Sir William Stanley ; Oxford ; the highly feared Pembroke ; Sir James Blunt ; Rice ap Thomas , with a valiant crew ; and many other famous and powerful noblemen .
Now we wear the wreaths of victory on our heads .
I'm left with nothing to do in this weak , idle peacetime , unless I want to look at my lumpy shadow in the sun and sing about
Won't King Richard let me speak with him ?
No , my good lord .
So be calm .
Hastings and Edward's children , Rivers and Grey , holy King Henry and your fine son Edward , Vaughan , and all who have died from underhanded , corrupt , fiendish injustice , if your angry souls are witnessing this moment through the clouds , enjoy the revenge , laugh at my ruin !
This is It is , my lord .
Why , then , it's my body's doomsday .
Today I'm going to get what I said I wished would happen to me if I was ever false to King Edward's children or his wife's allies .
This is the day I'm going to get what I wished for when I wished that the person I most trusted would betray me .
This , this All-Souls ' day , is my just desserts .
I tried to play games with God , and he turned my fake prayer on my head , giving me for real what I'd asked for as a joke .
This is how God forces wicked men to turn their swords against themselves .
I have done wrong , so I will suffer wrong .
I suspect his friends will join us .
He has no friends except those who are too afraid to defy him .
In his greatest need , even they will desert him .
All to our advantage .
So , in God's name , let's march .
Hope with good cause is swift ; it flies as fast as a swallow .
It turns kings into gods and men of lower rank into kings .
My heart is ten times lighter than my looks .
My Lord of Norfolk , Here , most gracious king .
Norfolk , we're going to have a few blows , right ?
We've got to give them and take them , my lord .
I'll lie here tonight .
But where will I lie tomorrow ?
Well , it doesn't matter .
Six or seven thousand , at most .
Why , our troops amount to three times that .
Besides , the king's name is a tower of strength ; the opposition doesn't have that advantage .
Let's be disciplined and not delay , because tomorrow is a busy day .
My Lord of Oxford , you , Sir William Brandon , and you , Sir Walter Herbert , are going to stay with me .
Good Captain Blunt , tell the earl goodnight from me , and tell him that by two in the morning I would like him to visit my tent .
Unless I've mistaken his battle flags , which I'm sure I haven't , his regiment lies at least half a mile south of the king's mighty army .
If it's possible to do this without putting yourself in danger , dear Captain Blunt , say goodnight to him from me and give him this important note .
Upon my life , my lord , I'll do it .
There is a man who loves you better than your husband could .
Name him .
Plantagenet .
Yes , that's my husband's name .
Someone else has the same name , but he's a better man .
Where is this man ?
Here .
Why do you spit at me ?
If only I could spit poison .
Poison never came from such a sweet place .
Poison never landed on such an ugly toad .
Get out of my sight !
You're poisoning my eyes .
Your beautiful eyes , sweet lady , have infected mine with love .
I wish my eyes were
Good night , dear Captain Blunt .
Come , gentlemen , let's discuss tomorrow's action in my tent .
The night air is too raw and cold for us to stay outdoors .
What time is it ?
It's dinnertime , my lord .
It's nine o'clock .
I'm not going to eat dinner tonight .
Give me some ink and paper .
Is the visor of my helmet working better now ?
And has my armor been put in my tent ?
My good man Norfolk , hurry to your post .
I'm off , my lord .
Get up early tomorrow , at the sound of the lark , noble Norfolk .
I will , my lord .
Catesby .
Yes , my lord ?
Yes , my lord ?
Did you see the gloomy Lord Northumberland ?
Thomas , the earl of Surrey , and he were moving from troop to troop around twilight cheering up the soldiers .
Good , I'm satisfied .
Set it down .
Is my ink and paper ready ?
It is , my lord .
Ratcliffe , around midnight come to my tent and help me put on my armor .
Now leave me alone , as I said .
Let fortune and victory be yours !
I wish you all the comfort that such a dark night as this can offer , noble father-in-law .
Tell me , how is my mother ?
Your mother sends her blessings .
To be brief , as the occasion requires , prepare to fight early in the morning , when your future will be decided .
I can't do everything I want to , but I'll help you as well as I can .
But I can't be too obvious about being on your side without risking the life of your stepbrother , young George .
Farewell .
The lack of time and the risk I'm under will have to keep us from bonding and catching up on each other's news the way we usually would after not seeing each other for so long .
I hope we have the time some day !
Again , goodbye .
Be brave and do well !
Again , good night , kind lords and gentlemen .
Oh God , whose side I think I'm fighting on , look kindly on my forces .
Make us your agents of revenge , so we can praise you when we're victorious !
Before I fall asleep , I entrust my soul to you .
Defend me , God , both when I'm asleep and when I'm awake .
I'm sweating and trembling with fear .
Myself ?
Yes , I am .
Then run away .
What , from myself ?
Why ?
Did I do anything good to myself ?
Oh , no .
I am a villain .
Fool , do not flatter yourself .
Give me another horse !
Bandage my wounds !
Have mercy , Jesus ! , Wait , I was only dreaming .
Oh cowardly conscience , how you're torturing me !
But what am I afraid of ?
Myself ?
There's no one else here .
Richard loves Richard , that is , there's just me and myself here .
Is there a murderer here ?
No .
Yes , I am .
Then run away .
What , from myself ?
Unfortunately , I love myself .
Why ?
Did I do anything good to myself ?
Oh , no .
Alas , I hate myself instead , because of the hateful deeds I've committed .
I am a villain .
Fool , speak well of yourself .
Fool , do not flatter yourself .
My lord .
Damn it , who's there ?
Ratcliffe , my lord , it's me .
The rooster has already crowed twice .
Your friends are up and buckling on their armor .
Oh Ratcliffe , I had a terrifying dream !
What do you think , will my friends prove loyal ?
No doubt , my lord .
By St. Paul , ghosts have struck more terror in my soul tonight than ten thousand of worthless Richmond's soldiers could , dressed up in their most sword-proof armor .
It's not yet daylight .
Come with me ; I'll spy under the tents to see if any of my own people plan to desert me .
Good morning , Richmond .
Pardon me , lords and gentlemen who stayed awake .
How did you sleep , my lord ?
Since you left , I've been enjoying the sweetest sleep and most promising dreams I've ever had , my lords .
I dreamed the souls of the people Richard murdered came to my tent and promised me victory .
I tell you , I feel very jolly remembering such a beautiful dream .
How late is it , lords ?
It's almost four .
Why , then , it's time to put on my armor and instruct the troops .
We have God and a good cause on our side .
The prayers of saints and those that Richard wronged support us like high-walled fortresses .
Other than Richard , even those whom we fight against would rather we won .
Because who is this man they follow ?
If you struggle to bring down a tyrant , you will sleep peacefully when the tyrant is killed .
When you fight against your country's enemies , you will be paid for your efforts with your country's wealth .
If you fight to protect your wives , your wives will welcome you home as conquerors .
When you free your children from the sword , your grandchildren will repay you in your old age .
So , in the name of God and all the good that will come of this
I wish they were , so that I could die right now , because , at this point , I live a living death .
I never tried to win over a friend or enemy with sweet words .
If your vengeful heart can't forgive me , here , take my sword and bury it in my heart so that my soul , which adores you , can be free .
No , don't pause , because I
What did Northumberland say about Richmond ?
That he was never trained as a soldier .
That's true .
And what did Surrey say to that ?
He smiled and said , "The better for us." He's right , and that's how it is .
Read the time there .
Give me an almanac .
I didn't , my lord .
Ratcliffe !
My lord ?
The sun will not appear today .
The sky frowns and scowls on our army .
I wish there wasn't so much dew on the ground .
So , the sun won't shine today !
Get ready , my lord .
The enemy is making its appearance on the battlefield .
Hurry , hurry , prepare my horse .
John Duke of Norfolk and Thomas Earl of Surrey will lead the horsemen and foot soldiers .
I'll follow in the center of the troop formation , which I'll defend with my best horse , and with Saint George on my side , as well !
What do you think , Norfolk ?
A good plan , warrior king .
I found this pinned to my tent this morning .
Listen !
I hear their drums .
Startle even the sky with the sound of your lances cracking .
What does Lord Stanley say ?
Will he bring his army ?
My lord , he refuses to come .
Off with his son George's head !
My lord , the enemy has already passed the marsh .
Let George Stanley die after the battle .
Let's go !
Victory is with us .
Help , my lord of Norfolk , help , help !
The king performs more wonders than seem humanly possible , challenging every enemy he sees .
His horse is killed , so he's fighting on foot , risking his life to search out Richmond .
Help , dear lord , or the battle will be lost !
A horse , a horse , I'd give my kingdom for a horse !
Get off the field , my lord .
I'll find you another horse .
God and your work be praised , victorious friends .
Great God of heaven , say amen to all this !
But , tell me , is young George Stanley alive ?
He is , my lord , and safe in Leicester , where , if you'd like , we can retreat to .
John Duke of Norfolk , Walter Lord Ferrers , Sir Robert Brakenbury , and Sir William Brandon .
As I vowed , I will unite the York and Lancaster families .
Smile , then , on this beautiful union .
What traitor hears me and doesn't say amen ?
Now let Richmond and Elizabeth , the true heirs of each royal house , be joined together !
Gracious Lord , blunt the swords of those traitors who mean to tear poor England apart again !
Let those who would mar this fair land's peace with treason die before they can enjoy its wealth .
Civil wounds now can heal , and peace can live again .
So that England may live a long life like this , let God say amen !
Take up the sword again , or take me up .
Get up , liar .
Though I wish you were dead , I'm not going to be the one to kill you .
I have already .
You said it when you were furious .
Say it again , just one word , and my hand , which killed your lover out of love , will kill your far truer lover .
You will be an accessory to both crimes .
I wish I knew what was in your heart .
I've told you .
I fear that your words and your heart are both false .
Then no man has ever been honest .
Well , then , put your sword away .
Tell me that you'll accept my love .
You'll know about that later .
But can I have some hope ?
I'd like to think all men have some hope .
Please wear this ring .
Wear both the ring and my heart , because both are yours .
And if I , your poor devoted servant , may ask you for one small favor , you will guarantee my happiness forever .
What's that ?
Please leave it to me to take care of the burial , as I have more reason to mourn than you do .
For various reasons that must remain secret , please do this for me .
I'll do it with all my heart .
Say goodbye to me .
Sirs , take up the corpse .
Toward Chertsey , noble lord ?
No , to the Whitefriars monastery .
Wait for me there .
Has anyone ever courted a woman in this state of mind ?
And has anyone ever won her , as I've done ?
I'll get her , but I won't keep her long .
And yet , against all odds , I win her over !
Ha !
Has she already forgotten her brave husband , Prince Edward , whom I stabbed on the battlefield three months ago in my anger ?
He was graced with lots of natural gifts , he was young , valiant , wise , and no doubt meant to be king .
And yet she cheapens herself by turning her gaze on me , who cut her sweet prince's life short and made her a widow ?
On me , though I am barely half the man that Edward was ?
On me , though I am limping and deformed ?
I bet I've been wrong about myself all this time .
Even though I don't see it , this lady thinks I'm a marvelously good-looking man .
Time to buy myself a mirror and employ a few dozen tailors to dress me up in the current fashions .
Since I'm suddenly all the rage , it will be worth the cost .
But first , I'll dump this fellow in his grave , then return to my love weeping with grief .
Come out , beautiful sun , until I've bought a mirror to admire my reflection in , I'll watch my shadow as I stroll along .
Be patient , madam .
I'm sure his majesty will recover his health soon .
Then you'll be able to cheer If he were dead , what would happen to me ?
But he's young , and as long as he's too young to become king , Richard , the duke of Gloucester , has power over him .
Richard loves neither me nor any of you .
Has it been decided that Richard will be It's been decided , though not yet officially announced .
I hope God makes you happy again , like you once were .
Did you see the king today , Lord Derby ?
Yes , the duke of Buckingham and I have just returned from visiting him .
What are the chances of his getting better , lords ?
Madam , keep up hope .
He seems cheerful .
God give him health .
Did you talk with him ?
Yes , madam .
I wish I could believe you that all was well !
They're out to get me , and I won't stand for it !
Which of you has been complaining to the king that I don't like them ?
Can't a plain man live and do no harm to anyone without being taken advantage of by a bunch of slick , sneaky lowlifes ?
Which of us are you referring to ?
You , who are neither honest nor good .
When did I ever do you any harm ?
Or any of you ?
Damn you all !
The king , whom I hope God will protect better than you would like , can't get a minute's rest without you bothering him with your outrageous complaints .
Brother , you've made a mistake .
He I can't tell what's going on .
The world has become so bad that now little wrens have settled where eagles used to roost .
Come , come , I know what you're referring to , Richard .
You resent my friends ' rise in society , and my own .
Let's hope we never need your help for anything .
Meanwhile , we're the ones who need you .
My brother is imprisoned because of you , I am disgraced , and the nobility are held in contempt while those who two days ago weren't worth a dime have suddenly been promoted .
By the Lord who raised me to this weighty post from the happy and carefree life I used to enjoy , I promise you I never did anything to get the king to turn against the duke of Clarence .
Since I can't amuse myself by being a lover , I've decided to become a villain .
I've set dangerous plans in motion , using lies , drunken prophecies , and stories about dreams to set my brother Clarence and the king against each other .
His majesty is so concerned about my personal safety that he has ordered them to conduct me to the You're being arrested ?
Why ?
Because my name is George .
That's not your fault !
He should imprison the person who named you , instead .
Maybe the king is sending you to the Tower to have you renamed .
But , really , what's going on , Clarence ?
Can you tell me ?
She could even what ?
Certainly , your grandmother had a worse match .
My lord of Gloucester , I have suffered your blunt upbraidings and your bitterness toward me for too long .
By God , I will tell the king about these taunts .
I would rather be a country serving maid than a great queen if it meant I could escape your scorn and constant harassment .
I've had very little joy as England's queen .
If you were king , we would do the same .
If I were king ?
I'd rather be a peddler .
Hear me , you wrangling pirates .
Which of you does not tremble when you see me ?
Ugly , wrinkled witch , what are you doing here ?
Only describing what you have ruined .
Or at least that's what I plan to do before I let you go .
Weren't you banished on pain of death ?
I was .
The sorrow that I feel actually belongs to you , and the high life you enjoy actually belongs to me .
Oh , killing that child was the dirtiest , most merciless deed there ever was !
Tyrants themselves wept when they heard about it .
Even What , were you all snarling before I arrived , ready to catch each other by the throat like dogs , but now that I'm here , you turn your hatred toward me ?
All because of what happened to that brat Rutland ?
Enough of your magic spells , you hateful , withered hag .
And leave you out ?
Don't move , dog .
It's your turn now .
Richard .
Yes ?
I didn't call you .
I beg your pardon , I thought it was me whom you were calling all those terrible names .
Yes , I was , but I don't want an answer from you .
Let me finish my curse .
I've finished it for you , and it ends in "Margaret." He's turned your curse against you , Margaret .
Poor imitation queen , why do you align yourself with this humpbacked spider when he's got you trapped in his deadly web ?
The day will come when you'll wish I could help you cast spells against this poisonous , hunchbacked toad .
Woman , stop your frantic curses and false prophesies before we run out of patience and do something bad to you .
Shame on you ; I've already run out of patience with you all .
If you got what you deserved , you would learn some respect .
What I deserve is that you treat me like a queen , and what you deserve is to act like my subjects .
Give me what I deserve , and do your duty !
People in high positions are shaken by many blasts of wind , and when they fall , they shatter into pieces .
Good advice , indeed .
Take it to heart , Dorset .
It applies to you as much as to me , my lord .
But you turn that sun into a shadow .
You are building your nest in
Stop , if you can't be kind , at least have some shame .
How dare you talk about kindness or shame .
Enough , enough .
Your clothes aren't spattered with my family's blood , and you aren't affected by my curse .
No one here is affected by your curse , because curses are just words with no power .
What is she saying , my lord ?
Nothing that interests me , my good lord .
What , you ignore my kind advice and try to please the devil I'm warning you about ?
Her curses have made my hair stand on end .
Mine , too .
I don't understand why she's not locked up .
I can't blame her .
I never caused her any harm , as far as I know .
But you have all the advantages from the harm done .
And look how he's repaid poor Clarence for his loyalty , penned him up like a pig being fattened for slaughter .
God pardon those who are responsible for Clarence's troubles .
I always pray for them
I'll tell you as soon as I know , Richard , because at this point I have no idea .
He picked out the letter "G" from the alphabet and said a wizard told him that "G" will take the throne away from his children .
He thinks "G" is me .
Well , this is what happens when men let themselves be ruled by women .
The king isn't the one sending you to the Tower , Clarence .
It's his wife , Lady Grey , who got him to do this .
Madam , his majesty asks for you , and for you , Duke of Gloucester , and for you , my noble lords .
We will wait on you , your majesty .
I do the wrong and am the first to start quarrels .
Dressing my out-and-out wickedness in scraps of Scripture , I look like a saint exactly when I'm most like the devil .
But quiet .
Are you going to take care of this thing now ?
We are , my lord .
Good thinking .
I have it on me here .
Tut , tut , my lord , we're not going to stand around chit-chatting .
Talkers aren't good doers .
Rest assured that we're going there to use our hands , not our tongues .
When fools cry , you remain stony .
I like you guys .
Hurry now , get the job done .
We will , my noble lord .
Why do you look so depressed today , your Grace ?
What was your dream ?
Tell me .
I thought I had escaped from the Tower and was on a ship to France with my brother Richard , who persuaded me to leave my cabin and walk on deck with him .
Looking toward England , we reminisced about the countless frightening experiences we'd had in the wars between the Yorks and the Lancasters .
Lord , how painful it was to drown .
I saw a thousand shipwrecks , a thousand men whom fish had gnawed to the bone , huge anchors , chunks of gold , heaps of pearls , and precious jewels , all scattered on the bottom of the sea .
So you had time as you were dying to look around ?
It wouldn't let my soul find its way to air but smothered it inside my gasping body .
In fact , the real nightmare had only just begun .
With the help of the grim The first to greet me there was my great
Clarence has arrived , lying , cowardly I'm not surprised it scared you , my lord .
It scares me just to hear you talk about it .
I did them for Edward's sake , and look how he rewards me. , Oh God , if my prayers don't satisfy you , and you have to avenge the wrongs I've done , at least punish me alone !
Please spare my innocent wife and children ! , Kind warden , please stay with me for a while .
I'm feeling very low , and I need to sleep .
I'll stay , my lord .
May God bring you sleep !
Sorrow interrupts all hours and seasons .
The only glory princes have are their titles .
What do you want , fellow ?
And how did you get in here ?
I want to speak with Clarence , and I came here on my legs .
That's it ?
Well , sir , it's better to say little than to be tedious .
It orders me to hand the noble duke of Clarence over to you .
Here are the keys , and there is the duke , sleeping .
You may , sir .
That's a wise idea .
Goodbye .
What , should I stab him while he sleeps ?
No .
When he wakes up !
Why , he won't wake up till Judgment Day .
Okay , so that's when he'll say we stabbed him in his sleep .
That word "judgment" makes me feel a bit guilty .
What , are you afraid ?
Not of killing him , because I have a warrant for it , but of being damned for killing him , which no warrant can protect me from .
I thought you were resolved to do this .
I am resolved , to let him live .
I'll go back to the duke of Gloucester and tell him so .
Please , just wait a minute .
I'm hoping my holy mood will pass .
It usually only lasts about twenty seconds .
How are you feeling now ?
Actually , I'm still feeling some pangs of conscience .
Remember the reward we're getting when the deed's done .
Jesus , let's kill him !
I forgot about the reward .
Where's your conscience now ?
Oh , in the duke of Gloucester's wallet .
When he opens his wallet to give us our pay , your conscience will fly out ?
It won't matter .
Let it fly out .
No one will listen to it .
And what will you do if it returns to you ?
I won't bother with it .
It blushes , is easily embarrassed , and stages regular uprisings in a man's heart .
I'm strong-willed .
He won't get the better of me .
Spoken like a brave man who respects his reputation .
Shall we get to work ?
We'll hit him on the head with the handles of our swords , then throw him in the wine barrel in the next room .
What an excellent idea , he'll soak up the wine !
Strike !
No , first let's talk to him .
Where are you , keeper ?
Give me a cup of wine .
You'll have wine enough , my lord , soon .
In God's name , who are you ?
A man , like you .
But not a member of the royal family , like me .
And you're not loyal , like us .
Your voice is loud and commanding , but you look like a working man .
I'm speaking for the king , but I look like myself .
Your eyes look threatening .
And why are you so pale ?
Who sent you here ?
Why are you here ?
To , to , to , To murder me ?
Yes .
You barely have the heart to tell me , so you can't possibly have the nerve to do it .
Besides , how have I offended you , my friends ?
You didn't offend us , you offended the king .
He and I will make up .
Never , my lord .
So prepare to die .
It's your job in life to kill the innocent ?
What did I do wrong ?
Where's the evidence against me ?
Where's the jury , the judge , the lawful proceedings , the verdict ?
Who pronounced this death sentence before a court of law could even convict me ?
For you to threaten to kill me is most unlawful .
If you hope to have your sins forgiven by Christ's dear blood , which He shed for our terrible sins , you must leave and keep your hands off me .
What we do we have been commanded to do .
All right .
If you like , Brakenbury , you can listen to anything we say .
We're not saying anything treasonous , man .
We say the king is wise and good , and his noble queen is getting old , pretty , and not jealous .
What do you think ?
Is there anything inaccurate in that ?
I have nothing to do with what you're talking about , my lord .
Her husband , you rascal .
Are you going to get me in trouble ?
I beg your
And the one who commands us is our king .
He does , and now he's taking revenge on you , for breaking promises and for murder , too .
Whom you swore you would protect and defend .
How dare you tell us about God's laws when you have broken them so savagely yourself ?
But for whose sake did I do that sick deed ?
For my brother Edward's sake .
If God will be revenged for this deed , he will do it publicly .
God doesn't need to use indirect or illegal means to kill those who have offended him .
My brother's love , the devil , and my own anger made me do it .
I am his brother , and I love him very much .
You're mistaken .
Richard , the duke of Gloucester , hates you .
No , he loves and cherishes me .
Go to him from me .
We will .
Tell him that when our noble father , the duke of York , gave his three sons his blessing , he never imagined that our friendship would come to this .
Remind Richard of this , and he will weep .
Yes , he'll weep stones , as he taught us to do .
Yes , as kind as snow to a harvest .
Come on , you're fooling yourself .
It's Richard who sent us here to slaughter you .
Well , that's what he's doing , making you free to enjoy heaven .
Make peace with God , for you must die , my lord .
You have enough holy feeling to advise me to "make peace with God , " but you're willing to go to war with God by murdering me ?
Oh sirs , consider this : those who sent you to do this deed will hate you for doing it .
Relent , and save your souls .
If either of you were a prince's son , and you were imprisoned as I am now , and two murderers like yourselves came to you , wouldn't you beg for your life ?
Yes , you would beg , if you were in my position .
Relent ?
No .
That's cowardly and womanish .
Look behind you , my lord .
Take that , and that .
A What's going on ?
What did you mean by not helping me ?
By God , I'm going to tell the duke how slack you've been .
I wish you could tell him I saved his brother .
I'm not .
Go , coward that you are .
Well , I'll go hide the body in some hole until the duke gives orders for his burial .
And when I get my reward , I'll get out of here .
Here comes your father .
Don't even think about refusing .
I must and will have Katherine for my wife .
Now , Signior Petruchio , how are you getting on with my daughter ?
Beautifully , sir , beautifully !
Now , daughter Katherine ?
Are you down in the dumps ?
You have the nerve to call me daughter ?
Sir , this is the truth : you and the rest , all the people who have ever talked about her , have all been wrong .
She has the patience of a I'll see you hanged on Sunday first !
Listen to that Petruchio : she says she'll see you hanged first .
Is this your idea of success ?
So much for our plan .
Relax , gentlemen .
I've made my choice .
If she and I are happy , what's it to you ?
When we were alone , we agreed that in public she would go on being unpleasant .
I tell you , though , it's incredible how much she loves me .
Darling Kate !
You men are rank beginners !
Give me your hand , Kate .
I'm off to Venice to buy outfits for the wedding .
God give you joy , Petruchio .
Call it a match !
Amen to that !
We'll be your witnesses .
Father , wife , friends , farewell !
I'm off to Venice .
Sunday is just around the corner .
We're to be married on Sunday .
Was there ever a match put together so quickly ?
I've made a risky investment .
The only profit I seek is a peaceful match .
There's no doubt that Petruchio's got quite a catch .
Now , Baptista , let's turn to your younger daughter .
We've been waiting a long time for this day .
I'm your neighbor and came courting first .
Callow youth , you don't yet know how to love !
And you're all sizzle .
Stand back , boy .
Age is the thing that nourishes .
Enough , gentlemen .
I will settle this matter .
First of all , my house in the city , as you know , is filled with expensive furniture and household articles , china and gold , basins and pitchers for her to wash her dainty hands in .
Then , at my farm I have a hundred milk cows , a hundred and twenty fat oxen in my stables , and all the equipment necessary to maintain them .
Two thousand ducats a year from his land !
I can't offer her more than all I have .
I must admit your offer is the best .
Otherwise , forgive me , but if you should die before him , what becomes of her dowry ?
Oh , and young men never die ?
As you know , next Sunday my daughter Katherina is to be married .
I believe your Honor is thinking of a character called Soto .
Yes , that was it .
You gave an excellent performance .
There is a particular lord who will watch you perform tonight .
Go , lad , and take them to the pantry .
Farewell , good neighbor .
Your father would be a fool to give you all his wealth and spend his declining years as a guest in your house .
It's absurd .
An old Italian fox is never that generous , my boy .
Sneaky , dried-up old coot !
Usually fathers produce children , not the other way around .
But in this case of wooing , a child shall father his own father , if my wits don't fail me .
I'll have my lessons in the order and manner
Where did we leave off ?
Here , madam : Translate .
Now let me see if I can translate it .
There's no need to be , really , for , You're my teacher , so I must believe you .
But let it go. , Now , Litio , it's your turn .
I hope , sir , that you're not angry that I've been equally attentive to you both !
You call this a scale ?
I don't like it .
I like doing things the old-fashioned way .
Mistress , your father requests that you leave your books and come help decorate your sister's room .
You know tomorrow is her wedding day .
Farewell to both of you , dear teachers .
I have to go .
But there's reason for me to look more closely at this schoolmaster .
He acts like a man in love .
The humiliation is all mine .
So now everyone will point at me and say , "Look , there goes the wife of that comedian Petruchio , if he could be bothered to marry the pathetic thing ! "
Maybe , but I wish I'd never laid eyes on him .
Go , daughter .
I can not blame you now for weeping .
Master , master !
I have news , old news such as you never heard before !
You say you have news that's old ?
How can that be ?
Well , is it not news that Petruchio's coming ?
Is he here ?
Why , no , sir .
What then ?
He is coming .
When will he be here ?
When he stands where I am and sees you there .
Who comes with him ?
He's dressed like a freak , a total freak , and not at all like a proper footman or a gentleman's valet .
I am glad he's coming , however he's dressed .
Why , sir , he's not coming .
Didn't you just say he was ?
Who ?
Petruchio ?
Yes , Petruchio .
No , I said his horse is coming , with him on its back .
Well , that's the same thing .
No , by Saint Jamy , I'll bet you a penny !
You are welcome , sir .
I'll give you more instructions later .
I know the boy will be a convincing gentlewoman , taking up her exact walk and talk and gentle gestures .
I can't wait to hear him call the drunkard "husband , " and to watch my men smother their laughter as they pay their respects to this simple peasant .
I'll go and coach them .
Where is my lovely bride ?
Why , sir , you know this is your wedding day .
It's a long story , and tough to listen to .
But where is Kate ?
We're wasting time here .
Don't greet your bride in these disgraceful clothes .
Go to my room and put on something of mine .
Not me .
I'll see her like this .
But surely you're not planning to
Yes , just like this .
Though I expect she'll wear me out more quickly than I'll wear out what I'm wearing , which will be good for her and even better for me !
But what a fool I am to stand here chatting when I should bid good morning to my bride and seal the bargain with a loving kiss .
He must be wearing this crazy outfit for some reason .
I'll try to persuade him to put on something more appropriate before going to the church , if it's at all possible .
I'll go too and make sure that happens .
And
We'll outwit them all , that old geezer , Gremio ; the suspicious father , Minola ; the prim musician lover , Litio , all for the sake of my master , Lucentio .
Signior Gremio , are you coming from the church ?
As eagerly as I ever came from school .
Bridegroom ?
No , he's a devil , a devil , I tell you !
Why , she's a lamb , a dove , a child compared to him !
She trembled and shook because he stamped and swore and carried on as though the vicar were trying to put something over on him .
Finally , the ceremony done , he called for wine .
Next he slung his arm around the bride's neck and kissed her with such a smack that when they parted the sound of their lips made the whole church echo .
That was the limit for me .
It's disgraceful !
There go the minstrels .
You're not thinking of leaving tonight , surely ?
Not tonight , today .
If you knew the reason , you'd understand and would urge me to go rather than stay .
Good friends , I thank you all for coming to see me wed this patient , sweet , virtuous wife .
Goodbye to you all .
Can't do it .
As a favor to Nope .
As a favor to I'm delighted .
Delighted to stay ?
Delighted to hear you ask so nicely , but I won't stay in any case .
Look , if you love me , stay .
Grumio , get me my horse .
Yes , sir , they're ready .
They've eaten themselves sick .
The door is open , sir .
Go on , wear your boots out !
As for me , I'll leave when I like .
Calm down , Kate .
Please don't be angry .
I will be angry .
What business is it of yours ? , Father , be quiet .
He'll stay as long as I say .
Okay , now it starts !
Gentlemen , on to the bridal dinner .
I see a woman may be made a fool of if she doesn't have nerve enough to stand up for herself .
They
No , let them go .
They're certainly a peaceful couple !
That since she's mad herself , she's married a madman .
Neighbors and friends , though we don't have anyone for the bride and bridegroom's places at the table , you know there's nothing missing in the feast itself .
She shall , Lucentio .
Come , gentlemen , let's go in .
To hell with all worn-out horses , all crazy masters , and all bad roads .
Was a man ever beaten as much as me ?
Was a man ever as dirty as me ?
Was a man ever so tired ?
I have been sent on ahead to light a fire , and they are coming after to warm themselves .
It's a good thing I'm like a little pot and warm up quickly , or else my lips themselves would freeze and stick to my teeth , my tongue to the roof of my mouth , and my heart would freeze in my belly , before I managed to get thawed out .
I'll warm myself by blowing on the fire .
Who calls so coldly ?
A piece of ice .
Trust me , you could slide all the way from my shoulder to my heel taking no more of a running start than the distance between my head and my neck .
Start the fire , good Curtis .
Are my master and his wife coming , Grumio ?
Yes , yes , Curtis , so hurry up and start the fire .
Leave out the water .
Is she as fiery a shrew as they say ?
Well she was , good Curtis , before this frost .
Your horn is a foot long , and I'm at least that size .
So tell me , Grumio , how goes the world ?
Therefore , do your duty and take your reward , because my master and mistress are nearly frozen to death .
The fire is ready .
So go on , tell me the news .
I think I'm getting delirious .
Where's the cook ?
Is supper ready ?
Are all the cups and glasses in their places , the tablecloths laid out , everything in order ?
For God's sake , would someone bring me a mug of beer !
Would your Honor like to try this dried fruit ?
What garment would your Honor like to wear today ?
I'm Christopher Sly .
Everything's ready .
So tell me what's been going on .
Well , first of all , my horse is tired and my master and mistress have had a falling out .
How ?
From their saddles into the dirt , but that's another story .
Well , let's have it , Grumio .
Lean forward .
Here .
There !
This is to feel the news , not hear it .
That's what makes it "sensitive" news .
I was just knocking to see if anyone was home .
Now , I'll begin : first , we came down a steep hill , my master riding behind my mistress , Both on one horse ?
What's the difference ?
Well , the difference of a horse !
It's too bad .
Yes , as you and the rest will find out as soon as he's home .
But why am I telling you this ?
Get them in here , Nathaniel , Joseph , Nicholas , Philip , Walter , Sugarsop , and the rest .
Tell them to slick down their hair , brush their blue coats , and make sure their socks match .
Have them click their heels together and don't dare touch a hair of the master's horse's tail till they kiss their hands .
Are they all ready ?
They are .
Get them in here .
She already has a face .
Yeah , so ?
You just said they had to face her .
I meant they had to give her credit .
She's not going to borrow money from them .
Welcome home , Grumio .
What's up , Grumio ?
Hey , Grumio !
My man Grumio !
So what's the story , old boy ?
Any minute .
Where are those bastards ?
Here , here , sir !
Here , sir !
Here , sir !
Here , sir !
Here , sir !
Here , sir ! " You stupid , unpolished dolts !
Where is the fool I sent on ahead ?
Here , sir , as foolish as ever .
You unwashed farmworker !
You bastard workhorse drudge !
Didn't I tell you to meet me outside and bring these morons with you ?
Nathaniel's coat was being fixed , sir .
And Walter couldn't get his dagger out of its sheath .
Only Adam , Rafe , and Gregory were ready .
Go , blockheads , go , and bring my supper to me .
Where are my slippers ?
Can we have some water please here ? , Come and wash , Kate , make yourself at home .
Take it easy !
Please !
It was just an accident !
Will you say grace , sweet Kate , or shall I ? , What is this ?
Mutton ?
Yes .
Who brought it out here ?
I did .
You bastards !
Where is that moron of a cook ?
How dare you serve it to me this way !
There , take it all back , plates , cups , the whole thing .
Please , dear , calm down .
The meat was fine if you wanted to eat it .
And I'm telling you it was burnt and dried out .
Come , I'll show you your bridal chamber .
Peter , did you ever see anything like it ?
He's giving her a taste of her own medicine .
Where is he ?
Look out , he's coming !
Well , I've begun my reign with a carefully thought-out plan , and I have every hope of succeeding .
My falcon is now hungry and unfed and must not be given enough to eat until she comes to me , for if her hunger is satisfied , she'll pay no attention to the bait .
I have another plan to make my bird come to me and recognize her owner's call is to keep her from sleeping ,
the way trainers do with young hawks that flutter and flap and will not obey .
She had no food today and will have none .
Last night she got no sleep , and she won't get any tonight .
Just as I did with the meat , I'll make up some problem with the way the bed is made , and throw the pillow one way and the cushion the other , and the blanket over here and the sheets over there .
And if she starts to drop off , I'll rant and yell until I wake her up .
If anyone here knows a better way to tame a shrew , speak up , please .
It would be much appreciated .
What are you reading , teacher ?
Answer me that first .
I hope you're an expert in your field .
Let me come clean .
I'm not really Litio .
My name is Hortensio , sir .
Look how they kiss and carry on !
The hell with her !
Look how she carries on with him !
It's revolting !
Well , to be on the safe side , so I don't go back on my promise , I plan to get myself married to a wealthy widow within the next three days .
Farewell , then , Signior Lucentio .
From now on , goodness in women , not superficial beauty , will win my heart .
What , are you trying to make me crazy ?
I'm Christopher Sly , son of old Sly of Barton-on-Heath , a peddler by birth , a Oh , this is why your poor wife is mourning !
And this is why your servants hang their heads in sorrow !
Oh noble lord , consider your lineage .
Look how your servants wait on you , each one ready to do whatever you command .
Would you care to hear some music ?
Listen !
Do you want to sleep ?
We'll have a couch made up that's softer and more fragrant even than the bed of lustful
You're busted .
Hortensio and I have given you up .
You can't mean it , Tranio !
Have you both really given me up ?
Yes , ma'am , we have .
So Litio's out of the picture .
He's going after a young widow .
Well , good for him !
Yeah , and he's going to tame her .
Is that what he says ?
The taming school ?
Is there such a place ?
Master , master , I've been on the lookout so long , I'm ready to fall down dead , but I've got one , finally !
What does he look like , Biondello ?
And what about him , Tranio ?
Go , take your sweetheart and leave him to me .
May God keep you well , sir .
This is it , for now .
Mantua .
Killed ?
Why ?
That would be a little extreme !
It's a capital offense for anyone from Mantua to come to Padua .
Didn't you know ?
It's strange that you haven't heard .
I have promissory notes from Florence that I have to deliver .
Oh yes , sir , I have often been to Pisa , Pisa , City of Wise Men .
Oh sir , I accept .
And I'll be eternally grateful to you .
No , no , I can't , really .
The more I suffer , the more spiteful he becomes .
Did he marry me just to starve me ?
And if they don't find charity there , they find it someplace else .
But I , who have never known how to beg and never had to beg , am starved for food , dizzy with lack of sleep , kept awake with curses and fed with brawling .
And what irks me more than all these things put together is that he does it under the pretense of love , as though for me to eat or sleep would bring on fatal illness or sudden death .
What do you say to a calf's foot ?
Oh , lovely .
Can I have some ?
I'm afraid it will I'd love it .
Nice Grumio , bring me some .
I don't know .
I'm afraid it will make you too hot , too .
What do you say to a piece of beef with mustard ?
Yes , but the mustard is probably too hot .
Well then , the beef without the mustard .
Absolutely not .
You'll take the mustard or you'll get no beef from Grumio .
Then both , or one , or anything you like .
How about the mustard without the beef .
Get out of here , you measly , lying wretch .
Cheer up .
Give us a smile .
Look , love , see how devoted I am ?
I am sure , sweet Kate , this kindness deserves thanks .
What , not a word ?
I guess you don't want it .
Here , take away the dish .
Please , leave it here .
Thank you , sir .
Come , mistress Kate , I'll join you .
Now , tailor , let's see what you've got .
Lay out the gown .
What can I do for you , sir ?
Here is the cap your Worship ordered .
Why , this was modeled on a porridge bowl !
No , definitely not !
It's cheap and nasty !
It's like a cockleshell or a walnut shell , a joke , a prank , a doll's cap .
Take it away .
Bring me a bigger one .
I won't have one any bigger .
When you are gentle , you shall have one , too , and not till then .
Sir , I think I have the right to speak , and speak I certainly will .
I am not a child or an infant .
Better men than you have heard me speak my mind , and if you can't take it , then you'd better plug your ears .
You know , you're right .
It's a measly little cap , a dessert crust , a plaything , a silk pie .
I love you all the more for not liking it .
I don't care if you love me or not , I like the cap and I'll have it or I won't have any .
Now , your gown ?
Yes , yes .
Come , tailor , show it to us .
Merciful God !
What do you call this ?
A sleeve ?
It's like a cannon .
Carved it up and down like an apple tart ?
Snip and snip and cut and slash , it's got more holes than a sieve !
What in the world do you call this , tailor !
You told me to make it well and properly and in keeping with the current style .
Certainly , I did .
But if you remember , I didn't tell you to parody the style .
I won't take it .
Do whatever you want with it .
I never saw a better-designed gown , more elegant and pleasing and well made .
Yes , that's it !
It's a lie , you thread , you thimble , you measurement !
You flea , you louse , you winter cricket !
Disrespected in my own house by a spool of thread !
I tell you , you've ruined her gown .
It's not true .
The gown was made just as my master was directed .
Grumio gave the order for how it should be done .
I gave him no order .
I gave him the material .
But how did you want it made ?
With a needle and thread .
But didn't you expect us to cut the cloth ?
Well , don't face off with me .
You have bested many things , well don't try and best me .
I will not be faced or bested .
I tell you I requested that your master cut out the gown , but I didn't ask him to cut it all to pieces .
Why , here is the order to prove it .
Read it .
The note is a big fat liar if it says I said so .
Do you like pictures ?
You have a noble wife who is much more beautiful than any other woman in this declining age .
Before she began shedding tears all over her lovely face , she was the fairest creature in the world , and even now she has no equal .
I admit the cape .
I admit two sleeves .
Ah , there's the problem .
Error in the bill , sir , error in the bill !
I ordered that the sleeves be cut out and sewed up again , and I'll prove it in combat even if your little finger is armed with your thimble .
I am ready for you .
You take the bill and I'll take your yardstick .
God have mercy , Grumio !
He won't have a chance .
Well , sir , the gown is not for me .
You are right , it's for my mistress .
Go , take it away and let your master make whatever use of it he can .
Certainly not !
Take off my mistress ' gown for your master's use !
Why , what's the problem ?
Oh , sir , the problem goes far deeper than you realize .
Take up my mistress ' gown for his master's use !
Oh , that's disgusting !
Ah well , my Kate .
I mean , is the jay more precious than the lark because his feather is more beautiful ?
Is the snake better than the eel because the pattern on his back pleases the eye ?
Hardly , Kate .
If you regard it as shameful , put the shame on me .
We're off to eat and whoop it up at your father's house .
I hate to say it , but it's almost two and we won't get there before suppertime .
It shall be seven o'clock before I get on my horse .
Whatever I say , or think , or do , you're continually contradicting it .
Sirs , never mind .
We won't go today , or any day until it's clear that it shall be whatever time I say it is .
Yes , certainly .
Unless I am mistaken , Signior Baptista may remember me from the Pegasus in Genoa , where we both stayed twenty years ago .
Of course I will .
But , sir , here comes your servant .
Don't worry about me .
I told him that your father was in Venice , and that you expected him to arrive in Padua today .
He gives BIONDELLO Here comes Baptista .
Places , everyone !
Signior Baptista , I'm glad to see you. , Sir , this is the gentleman I told you of .
I hope you'll be a good father to me now .
Give me Bianca for my inheritance .
Sir , pardon me for what I am about to say .
I appreciate your frankness and your brevity .
It's true that your son Lucentio here loves my daughter , and she loves him , or else they're putting on quite an act .
Your son will have my consent to marry my daughter .
Not in my house , Lucentio .
My servants might overhear , and old Gremio is still hanging around , so we might be interrupted .
I hope with all my heart she will !
Cambio .
What is it , Biondello ?
You saw my master wink and laugh at you ?
What about it ?
Please , educate me .
He's talking with the bogus father about the bogus son .
And so , ?
You are to bring his daughter to the supper .
And then ?
The old priest at Saint Luke's Church is at your command at all hours .
And what of all this ?
I don't know , except they are busy with some phony guarantee .
So go and put your stamp on the girl .
Go to the church : take the priest , the clerk , and some reasonably honest witnesses .
If this isn't what you've been hoping for , I have no more to say except that you ought to say goodbye to Bianca forever .
I knew a girl who was married in an afternoon as she went to the garden for parsley to stuff a rabbit .
Farewell , sir .
My master has instructed me to go to Saint Luke's to tell the priest to be ready in case you should show up with your better half .
She will be pleased .
Then why am I worried ?
It will be hard if "Cambio" loses her .
Come , let's continue on toward your father's house .
Good Lord , how bright and splendid is the moon tonight !
The moon ?
You mean the sun !
It is not nighttime now .
I say it's the moon that shines so bright .
I know it's the sun that shines so bright .
Now , by my mother's son , and that's me , it will be moon or star or whatever I want before I'll travel to your father's house .
I say it's the moon .
I know it's the moon .
Well , you're a liar , then .
It's the blessed sun .
Then God be praised , it Petruchio , do whatever you like .
You've won .
Well , onward , then .
That's how things should be , straight and smooth .
But , hang on !
I hear someone coming .
Young budding virgin , fair and pure and sweet , where are you off to ?
Your parents are lucky to have such a lovely child .
Is Would your Mightiness care to wash his hands ?
We're overjoyed to see you sane again .
If only you had a clearer memory of who you are !
These past fifteen years you have been living in a dream , and even when you were awake , it was as though you slept .
Fifteen years !
That's some nap .
But I never spoke the whole time ?
Oh yes , you spoke , my lord , but total nonsense .
But sir , there is no such house , no such maid , and no such men as you have dreamed up , like a certain Stephen Sly and one old John Naps of Greece , a Peter Turph , one "Henry Pimpernell , " and twenty more men of this sort , who never actually existed .
Why , dear me , Kate !
I hope you haven't lost your mind .
This is not a maiden , as you say , but an old man , wrinkled , faded , and withered .
Well , sir , and you , witty lady , who gave me quite a turn with your strange talk , my name is Vincentio , my hometown Pisa , and I am traveling to Padua to visit a son of mine whom I haven't seen in a long while .
What is his name ?
Lucentio , sir .
A fortunate coincidence , more fortunate for your son .
The sister of my wife , this lady here , is married to your son .
And there's no need for wonder or worry .
Let me embrace the father of Lucentio , and then we'll journey on to see your son , who will rejoice at your arrival .
I assure you , sir , it's true .
Well , Petruchio , all this is very encouraging .
The priest is already there .
We're off , Biondello .
I'll see them safely married first and then hurry back to my master's .
I wonder why Cambio hasn't shown up in all this time .
Here is the door , sir .
This is Lucentio's house .
My father-in-law lives closer to the marketplace .
That's where I'm going now , so I'll leave you here .
You must not go without having a drink first .
They're pretty busy in there .
You'd better knock louder .
Is Signior Lucentio at home , sir ?
What if a fellow were bringing him a couple of hundred pounds to toss around ?
I believe I have some choice in the matter , sir .
Come here , you wretch !
What , have you forgotten me ?
Forgotten you !
No , sir .
I could not forget you , since I never saw you before in my life .
My honorable , reverend master ?
Yes , of course .
There he is at the window .
Is that so ?
Help , help , help !
This madman will murder me .
How dare I ?
How dare What , is the man crazy ?
Your father !
Why , you scoundrel !
Your father is a sailmaker in Bergamo .
You're wrong , sir , very wrong .
Why , what do you imagine his name to be ?
His name !
Lucentio !
Oh God , he's murdered his master !
Oh , my son , my son !
Tell me , you monster , where is my son Lucentio ?
Take this mad wretch to jail. , Father-in-law Baptista , will you see that he's available to appear in court ?
Take me off to jail ?
He mustn't go to prison .
Be quiet , Signior Gremio .
I say he shall go to prison .
Be careful , Signior Baptista , lest you be made the dupe in this business .
I could swear this is the real Vincentio .
Well , no , not literally .
No , I know that you're Signior Lucentio .
Away with the doddering fool !
Take him off to jail !
We're ruined !
There he is !
Pardon , dear father .
Dear son , you're alive !
Pardon us , dear father .
What have you done ?
Where is Lucentio ?
I have made your daughter mine by marriage while false impressions blinded your eyes .
We've all been duped .
Where is that damned wretch , Tranio , who defied me in such a disgraceful manner ?
Say , isn't this the Latin master Cambio ?
Cambio is transformed into Lucentio .
It was love that performed these miracles .
Bianca's love made me trade places with Tranio while he masqueraded as me around town .
What Tranio did , he did at my command .
So pardon him , dear father , for my sake .
No , I'll slit the nose of the villain who would have sent me to jail .
But sir , have you married my daughter without my consent ?
Don't worry , Baptista , you'll be perfectly satisfied .
You'll see .
All I can hope for now is a share of the feast .
Let's follow them to see how this turns out .
First kiss me , Kate , and then we will .
What , here in the middle of the street ?
Are you ashamed of me ?
But I'm ashamed to kiss , sir .
All right then , back home we go .
No , wait .
I Isn't this good ?
Come , my sweet Kate .
Better late than never , and it's never too late to change .
Well , thank God I'm cured !
Amen .
I thank you all .
You won't regret this .
How is my noble lord ?
This is all quite pleasant .
Where is my wife ?
Here , noble lord .
What is your wish with regard to her ?
You call yourself my wife , yet you don't call me "husband" ?
It's my men who should call me "lord." I'm your man , your fellow .
My fair Bianca , bid my father welcome , while I with equal affection welcome yours .
This last course here is for closing up the stomach after great feasting .
Now everyone be seated , as this is the part where we sit and chat as well as eat .
All we do is sit and sit and eat and eat .
I wish that were true for both our sakes !
Hortensio
That's very sensible , but you missed my sense : I meant Hortensio is afraid of you .
He who is dizzy thinks the world is spinning .
A very candid reply .
What's that supposed to mean ?
That's what I conceive of him .
Nice save !
Kiss him for that , good widow .
He who is dizzy thinks the world is spinning" , please , tell me what you meant by that .
Your husband , being saddled with a shrew , projects his own suffering onto my husband .
And now you know my meaning .
A very nasty meaning .
My meaning And I
You tell her , widow !
I'll bet you a hundred marks , my Kate puts her flat on her back .
Well , that's really my job .
Well said !
Here's to you !
What do you think of these quick-witted folks , Gremio ?
They certainly do like to butt heads !
Yes , but not out of fear .
I'll go back to sleep now .
No , you shall not .
I'll
Well , she got away .
Signior Tranio , you also took aim at that bird , though you didn't hit her. , So here's a health to all who've shot and missed .
A witty if a cynical reply .
It's good you hunted for yourself , sir .
Tranio got you that time .
I thank you for that quip , good Tranio .
He's made me a little sore , I'll admit .
But since the gibe glanced off me , ten to one it hit you both straight on .
Seriously , though , son Petruchio , I think you have the most thoroughgoing shrew of us all .
Well , I disagree .
Agreed .
What's the bet ?
Twenty crowns .
Twenty crowns ?
I'd wager twenty times as much on my wife .
A hundred then .
Agreed .
Good !
It's a bet .
Who should begin ?
I will .
Biondello , go and tell your mistress to come to me .
Here I go .
Son , I'll stake you half that Bianca comes .
I'll have no halves .
What !
She's busy and can not come ! " Is that an answer ?
Yes , and a nice one at that .
Pray God your wife doesn't send you a worse one .
I'm hoping for better .
So , where's my wife ?
She says she thinks this is a prank .
She will not come .
She says that you should come to her .
Worse and worse !
She I can guess her answer .
What ?
She will not .
By all that's holy , here comes Katherina !
You sent for me , sir ?
Where are your sister and Hortensio's wife ?
They sit chatting by the parlor fire .
Go bring them here .
If they refuse to come , get physical , use a whip if you have to , but get them out here to their husbands .
This is a miracle , if you talk of miracles .
It is .
I wonder what it means .
It means peace and love and a quiet life , supremacy based on reverence and profound respect , and , not to go on and on about it , everything that's sweet and happy .
May good fortune come to you , good Petruchio !
You've won the wager , and I will add twenty thousand crowns to what they owe you .
Look , here she comes , with your ungovernable wives in tow , like prisoners of her womanly persuasion. , Katherine , that cap of yours doesn't look good on you .
Take it off and throw it on the ground .
Lord , may I never see a day of trouble until the day I let someone treat me like that .
For shame !
What kind of loyalty is this ?
I wish your loyalty were as foolish .
The wisdom of your loyalty , fair Bianca , has cost me a hundred crowns since dinner .
The more fool you for betting on my loyalty .
There will be no lecture .
She shall not .
I say she shall. , And first begin with her .
Girls , girls !
This disrespectful stance toward the man who is your lord , your king , your governor tarnishes your beauty the way the frosts of winter blights the land .
A woman owes her husband the same loyalty a subject owes his king .
And when she is peevish and perverse , sullen , sour , and disobedient to his honest wishes , what is she but a loathsome , warlike rebel and an ungrateful traitor to her loving lord ?
I am ashamed that women are so foolish as to declare war when they should plead on their knees for peace , that they seek authority , supremacy , and power when they are under an obligation to serve , love , and obey .
Why are our bodies soft and weak and smooth , unfit for toil and trouble in the world , if not so that our soft qualities and our hearts should agree with our external parts ?
Come , come , you weak , ungovernable worms !
My spirit has been as proud as each of yours , my courage as great , and my reason perhaps even better suited to bandy words back and forth and exchange frown for frown .
But now I see our weapons are like straws , our strength like a straw's weakness , and our weakness past comparison , so that we seem to be the thing we most are not .
Come on and kiss me , Kate .
It's nice to see children playing well together .
But not so nice when women misbehave .
Come , Kate , let's go to bed .
We three are married , but you two are defeated .
It's amazing , if I may say so , that she let herself be tamed .
Madam wife , they say I've been dreaming or asleep for more than fifteen years .
Yes , and it seemed twice as long to me , having been kept from your bed that whole time .
That's too long. , Servants , leave her and me alone .
Now , madam , undress and come to bed .
Thrice noble lord , I beg you to excuse me for another night or two , or at least until nightfall .
Your doctors have expressly forbidden me to sleep with you , as there's a risk that you might have a relapse .
I hope this explanation will stand as my excuse .
I'm not sure I can wait that long .
Still , I'd hate to see my former dreams return .
So I Your Honor's actors , hearing of your recovery , have come to perform a pleasing comedy for you , and your doctors approve wholeheartedly .
So they think it's a good idea for you to watch a play and direct your thoughts toward laughter and merriment , two strong preventive medicines that foster long life .
Okay , bring on the play .
What , like stuff from a house ?
No , it's a story .
Well , let's watch it .
We're not getting any younger .
I was born in Pisa , famous for its serious citizens , like my father before me ; my father , Vincentio , a successful , world-traveled merchant , was one of the
I'll fix you , I swear .
You thug !
Read your history !
We You won't pay for the glasses you smashed ?
No , not a penny .
Get out of my face .
Go play with yourself .
I know my rights .
I'm not moving an inch , pal .
Let them come , I don't care .
That's good advice .
Wait !
Who are all these people ?
Maybe it's a parade to welcome us to town , master .
Don't worry , I couldn't care less .
The only possible interest I could take in you would be to hit you on the head with a stool , paint your face with blood , and make a fool out of you .
May the good Lord keep me safe from all women like her !
Me too , Lord !
What a spoiled little brat .
Sister , be happy in my unhappiness. , Sir , I will humbly obey you .
I'll take comfort in my books and music , reading and practicing my instruments .
Listen Tranio !
That's Signior Baptista , will you really be this cruel ?
Why are you locking her away because of this fiend from hell , Signor Baptista ?
And because I know how fond she is of music , playing her instruments , and poetry , I plan to hire live-in tutors for her .
Katherina , you may stay .
I don't think so !
Am I to be dictated to , like a child ?
You can go straight to hell !
So long .
That is , if we ever want to return to being rivals for Bianca's love .
And that would be , ?
To find a husband for her sister .
A husband ?
You mean a devil !
I mean a husband .
I say a devil .
Do you really think there's a man fool enough to marry into hell , however rich the father is ?
Oh , I don't know .
Guys who'd take her with all her faults , provided there were enough money involved .
I don't know .
What do you say , Signior Gremio ?
This imaginary suitor for Katherina , I'd buy him the best horse in Padua if he'd get here quickly , woo her , marry her , take her to bed , and rid the house of her .
Let's go .
Sir , is it possible that a person could fall in love so suddenly ?
Oh , Tranio , until it happened to me , I never would have thought it possible .
The heart won't be reasoned with .
If love has touched you , love has touched you , end of story .
Yes , you're right .
Please go on .
I feel better already , and I know there's more good advice where that came from .
Master , you were so focused on the girl herself , I wonder if you missed the main point here .
Oh no !
Tranio , I saw her coral-pink lips move and perfume the air with her breath .
Oh , Tranio , what a cruel father he is .
Still , did you notice how ready he was to hire good tutors for her ?
I did , and now I've got it !
Tranio , I think I've got it !
I'll bet we're both thinking the same thing , master .
Tell me your idea first .
You will pretend to be a schoolmaster and offer to teach the girl .
It is .
Do you think it would work ?
No , not a chance .
Enough !
It's obvious : Here comes Biondello .
Where have you been , boy ?
Where have Come here , boy .
It's no time for jokes : sober up .
Understand ?
Of course , sir .
And you're not to utter a syllable of Tranio's name .
Wish I could say the same .
I'd second your wish if it automatically meant that Lucentio could have Baptista's youngest daughter .
This is for your master's sake , not mine .
When we're by ourselves you can call me "Tranio." Everywhere else , address me as your master Lucentio .
Tranio , let's go .
One last thing , and this is up to you .
You'll have to woo Bianca like the rest .
Don't ask why .
No , no .
Very impressive .
Is there any more , or is that it ?
And what an excellent piece of work it is , too , madam lady !
I wish it were over .
Huntsman , look after my hounds .
Let Merriman catch his breath , the poor dog's foaming at the mouth .
I think Belman is just as good , my lord .
I swear he's the better dog .
You're a fool .
If Echo were as fast , he would be worth a dozen like Belman .
But give them all a good dinner and look after them well .
I'll go hunting again tomorrow , I think .
I will , my lord .
What's this ?
A drunkard or a corpse ?
Check and see if he's breathing .
He is , my lord .
But this would be too cold a place to sleep if he hadn't warmed himself with ale .
Alas , grim death , how vile and ugly your near-twin , sleep , is !
What do you think ?
I'm off to visit my friends in Padua , particularly my best friend Hortensio .
And I think this is his house .
Here , you there , Grumio .
Knock .
Knock , sir ?
Whom should I knock ?
Has anyone offended your Worship ?
Moron !
I'm telling you to make a fist and pound .
My master is being difficult .
Say , what's the trouble ?
If it isn't my old friend Grumio , and my dear friend Petruchio !
How's everyone in Verona ?
Hortensio , have you come to break up the fight ?
I don't care what he told you in Latin .
I told him to knock at your gate and for the life of me could not get him to do it .
Knock at the gate ?
Oh , for Pete's sake !
Didn't you clearly say "Knock , " "pound , " and "put your fists to work" ?
Now you say it was "Knock at the gate" ?
I'm warning you .
Easy , Petruchio .
I'll vouch for Grumio .
Now , my dear friend , what lucky wind blows you in from Verona ?
The wind that scatters young men throughout the world , encouraging them to seek their fortunes some place other than home , where there's little to be found in the way of experience .
I have money in my purse and property at home , so I'm off to see the world .
I doubt you'd thank me in the end , but she's rich , all right , very rich .
But you're too good a friend for me to wish her on you .
Hortensio , good friends like us can get by on a few words .
I can help you find a wife who's rich , young , beautiful , and reared in a manner fit for a gentlewoman .
Her only flaw , and it's a big one , is that she's unbearable , a total witch , so much so that I wouldn't think of marrying her myself , not even if I were in a worse fix than I am , not for a whole goldmine .
Hush , Hortensio .
You don't know what money can buy .
Her father is Baptista Minola , a pleasant and courteous gentleman .
Her name is Katherina Minola , famous throughout Padua for her scolding tongue .
I don't know her , but I know her father and he knew mine well .
I won't sleep until I see her , Hortensio .
Wait , Petruchio , I should go with you .
His youngest daughter , the beautiful Bianca , is the jewel of my life , and he keeps her hidden away from me and other rivals for her hand .
Katherine the shrew ! " That's the worst thing you can call a young woman .
Now my friend Petruchio will help me out , presenting me to old Baptista as a schoolmaster for Bianca well-versed in music .
I'll disguise myself in somber robes .
Oh , Master , master , look !
Who are these people ?
Hush , Grumio .
It is my rival for Bianca .
Petruchio , let's stand over here awhile .
Oh , what an excellent thing this learning is !
Good to see you , Signior Hortensio .
Do you know where I'm going ?
To Baptista Minola's house .
That's great .
And I have met a gentleman who promises to help me find a good music tutor to instruct our lady love .
Gremio , this is no time to compete over how deeply we love Bianca .
That's good , if he'll really do it .
Have you told him all her faults , Hortensio ?
I know she is a hateful , brawling scold .
If that's all , gentlemen , I see no problem .
No ?
Tell me , friend .
Where are you from ?
My father's dead , and his fortune is mine now .
I hope to see good days , and many of them .
Sir , such a life with such a wife is unlikely !
But if you have the stomach for it , you'll have all the help from me you need .
Do you really mean to go after this wildcat ?
Why did I come here if not for that ?
I , who have survived storms at sea where the winds raged like wild animals ?
I , who have heard the rumble of guns in battle , and thunder in the sky ( heaven's version of artillery ) .
Listen , Hortensio .
Absolutely , so long as he gets the girl .
I wish I could be as certain of a good dinner .
Is that the man you want ?
But not the woman who scolds , anyway , I hope .
Sir , a word before you go .
Are you a suitor to the girl we speak of , yes or no ?
What if I am ?
Not if you go away , there isn't .
Because , if you must know , she's been chosen by Signior Gremio .
Because she's been chosen by Signior Hortensio .
Wait a minute , gentlemen .
Be good enough to hear me out .
Baptista is a noble gentleman , one to whom my father is not completely unknown , and lovely as his daughter is , she is entitled to any number of suitors , myself among them .
I don't think he'd have any choice , my lord .
When he woke , he wouldn't know where he was .
It would be just like a nice daydream or fantasy .
Well , take him on up and we'll try to pull it off .
Carry him to my best room , gently , so he doesn't wake , and hang all my erotic paintings around him .
Bathe his filthy head with warm , scented water .
Convince him that he has been out of his mind , and when he says he's out of his mind My lord , I promise we will play our parts so skillfully that he will believe everything we tell him .
The beautiful Helen of Troy had a thousand suitors .
This fellow will out-talk us all .
Hortensio , what's all this about ?
Yes , leave that labor to great Hercules , it's worse than the previous twelve put together .
Sir , that's well said and well thought out .
An excellent motion .
Let's go .
I second that
Dear sister , it's unfair to me , and unfair to yourself , to turn me into a slave .
That I won't stand for .
And don't lie .
You lying brat .
It's Hortensio , isn't it ?
Oh , I see .
You'll live in luxury with Gremio .
Is it because of
What , in my presence ?
You mean you don't even want to hear my side ?
Don't talk to me .
Now what ?
Good morning , neighbor Baptista .
Good morning , neighbor Gremio .
And to you , good sir .
Tell me , don't you have a virtuous and lovely daughter named Katherina ?
I have a daughter named Katherina , sir .
Please , Signior Gremio .
Allow me to continue. , I am a gentleman of Verona , sir , who , hearing of your daughter's beauty and wit , her friendly disposition and bashful modesty , her uncommon virtues and her mild behavior , have taken the liberty of presenting myself as a guest at your house in the hope of seeing for myself if what I've heard is true .
You and he are both welcome , sir .
As for my daughter Katherine , this much I know : she's not for you , more's the pity .
I see you don't intend to part with her , or perhaps you don't like my company .
Don't misunderstand me , sir .
I'm just stating the facts as I see them .
Where are you from ?
What's your name ?
My name is Petruchio , son of Antonio , a man well known throughout Italy .
I know him well .
You are welcome for his sake .
You're Forgive me , Signior Gremio , but I'm anxious to get things moving .
No doubt , but you may be going about it the wrong way , Neighbor , this gift is very gracious , I'm sure .
I myself , who am more indebted to you than anyone , have brought you this young scholar
Many thanks , Signior Gremio .
Welcome , good Cambio .
Your name is Lucentio , you say .
Of what city , may I ask ?
A man of great influence .
I know him well by reputation .
You are very welcome here , sir .
Let's take a little walk in the orchard before dinner .
You are all most welcome here ; please make yourselves at home .
Signior Baptista , I'm actually in a bit of a hurry .
You knew my father well ; therefore , you know me , the sole heir to all his property and possessions , which I have added to rather than depleted .
So , tell me , assuming I win your daughter's love , what dowry would she bring to the marriage ?
Twenty thousand crowns now , and half my lands after my death .
Let's have explicit contracts drawn up to ensure that both sides keep their promises .
That counts for everything .
Oh , that's nothing , believe me , sir .
I'm as commanding as she is proud , and when two raging fires meet , they end up consuming the very thing that kindled them .
I'm that great gust to her fire .
Well , good luck !
But prepare yourself for some unpleasantness .
Mountains don't tremble , however much the wind may blow !
Why so pale , my friend ?
Will my daughter be a good musician , do you think ?
I think she'll be a better soldier .
You don't think you can teach her ?
I'll give you frets ! " With that , she clobbers me with the lute so that my head goes right through ,
I like this girl !
Now I want her more than ever .
I can't wait to meet her !
Please do .
I'll wait for her here and when she comes I'll take a novel approach with her .
If she rants , I'll tell her that she sings as sweetly as a nightingale .
If she glares , I'll say her brow is as clear as roses newly washed with morning dew .
If she is silent and won't speak at all , I'll praise her chattiness and say she speaks with piercing eloquence .
If she orders me to go , I'll thank her warmly as if she'd just offered to put me up for a week .
If she refuses my proposal , I'll tell her how much I'm looking forward to the announcement and the wedding .
Carry him gently to bed , and every man be ready at his post when he awakes .
Go , lad , and find out what the trumpet's sounding for .
It's probably some noble gentleman stopping off in mid-journey , thinking to spend the night here .
Sir , it's a troupe of actors who want to perform for your Lordship .
Have them come in .
You are welcome here , my friends .
We thank your Honor .
Were you thinking of spending the night here ?
Yes , if that would be all right with your Lordship .
By all means .
I remember this fellow , he once played the eldest son of a farmer .
It was the play in which you wooed the gentlewoman so successfully .
I have forgotten your name , but you were well cast in the role and played it convincingly .
Good morning , Kate , for I hear that's what you're called .
Is that what you've heard ?
Driven ? " Really ?
I had you figured for a piece of furniture .
What do you mean by "furniture" ?
A nice stool .
You're right , actually .
Come sit on me .
Asses are made for bearing , and so are you .
Women are made for
Not by the likes of you !
I know how Too light for a lout like you to catch , though no lighter than I should be .
Should be ?
If I'm a wasp , look out for my stinger .
All I have to do is remove it .
True , if a fool such as yourself could find it .
Everyone knows where a wasp wears its stinger .
In its tail .
No , in its tongue .
Whose tongue ?
Yours , if we're talking about I'm leaving .
You're leaving with my tongue in your tail ?
No , come back , Kate .
We'll see about that !
I swear I'll smack you if you hit me again .
Not if you want to keep your arms !
It has no fighting spirit .
Oh , come on now , Kate .
Don't look so sour .
That's my way , when I see a crab-apple .
There's no crab-apple here , so don't look sour .
There is a crab-apple here .
Show me .
I would , if I had a mirror .
What , you mean my face looks like a crab-apple ?
You know , you're right .
I probably am too young for you .
Maybe , but you're wrinkled all the same .
Oh , that's with worry .
Well , that doesn't worry me .
Let me go .
No , not a bit .
I find you quite gentle .
I was told that you were violent , proud , and sullen .
You haven't got it in you to frown or look displeased or bite your lip as angry women do .
No , you entertain your suitors with mild and gentle conversation , quiet and pleasant .
Why does the world report that Kate is lame ?
The world's a liar .
Kate is as straight and slender as a hazel-twig , her hair as brown as hazelnut shells , and she herself sweeter than the kernels .
Take a few steps , I want to see you walk .
Did Diana ever beautify a grove as much as Kate beautifies this room with her queenly movements ?
It's born of my A witty mother !
Too bad about the son !
Am I not wise ?
I'm the man who was born to tame you and change you from a wildcat Kate into a Kate as gentle and domestic as other household Kates .
I almost recognize that voice .
It's , But he's drowned , and these guys are devils .
Oh , God help me !
Four legs and two voices , a very special monster .
One voice speaks well and talks about his friend .
The other voice is harsh and abusive .
If it takes all the wine in my bottle , I'll cure him .
Come on .
CALIBAN Stephano !
Is your other mouth calling my name ?
Mercy , mercy !
This isn't a monster , it's a devil .
I'll leave him alone .
I have no interest in getting mixed up with the devil .
Stephano !
If you're Stephano , touch me and speak to me .
I'm Trinculo , don't be scared , your good friend Trinculo .
If you're Trinculo , then come out .
I'll pull on these smaller legs .
If any legs here are Trinculo's , these are .
But aren't you drowned , Stephano ?
I hope you're not drowned .
Has the storm passed ?
I hid under this monster's cloak to get out of the storm .
Are you really alive , Stephano ?
Oh , Stephano , two men from Naples survived !
Please stop turning me around .
My stomach's a little upset .
I swam ashore like a duck .
I can swim like a duck , I swear .
Here ,
Oh Stephano , do you have any more of that wine ?
I've got the whole barrel , man .
You come from heaven , don't you ?
No , from the moon , I'm telling you .
I used to be the man in the moon a long time ago .
My mistress showed me you in the moon and your dog and your bush .
I can't believe I was scared of him !
A pretty pathetic monster .
The man in the moon !
What a poor , gullible monster. , That was a nice big gulp , monster !
What a lying , drunken monster .
When his god falls asleep , the monster will snatch his wine bottle .
Come on , then .
Get down and swear it .
I'm going to laugh myself to death over this silly monster .
A rotten , foolish monster .
I could find it in my heart to beat him , Come on , kiss my feet .
An awful monster !
I'll show you where to get fresh water .
I'll pick berries for you .
I'll fish for you and get you plenty of firewood .
The tyrant I'm serving now can go to hell !
What a silly monster , to think a poor drunk is wonderful .
Show us the way without further delay. , Trinculo , since the king and all our comrades are drowned , we're the heirs of this place. , Here , carry my wine bottle. , Trinculo , my buddy , we'll get that bottle refilled soon enough .
A loud-mouthed , drunken monster .
Good monster !
Show us the way .
Right now I'd give a thousand
Some kinds of lowly activities are done for noble reasons .
And you can do poor things that lead to rich results .
This hard work would be boring and nasty to me , but I'm working for a mistress who makes me enjoy my labor .
Oh , she's ten times nicer than her father is mean , and he's the height of crabbiness .
I have thousands of logs to take away and pile up , on strict orders from him .
My sweet darling cries when she sees me work and tells me that such a wonderful man never performed such lowly tasks before .
These sweet thoughts relieve me and refresh me , especially when I'm slaving away busily .
Now , please , I beg you , don't work so hard .
I wish the lightning had burned up all those logs that you've been ordered to stack !
Please put that log down and rest a while .
When this wood burns , it'll weep for making you tired .
My father's studying hard , so he won't see you .
So please rest .
We're safe from my father for at least three hours .
Oh , my dear mistress , I won't be able to finish this work until sunset at the earliest .
If you sit down , I'll carry your logs a while .
Please give me that .
I'll take it over to the pile .
I'd be as right for the job as you are , and I'd do it more easily , since I'd have good will on my side .
You look tired .
I beg you to tell me your name so I can use it in my prayers .
Miranda. , Oh father , I've disobeyed you by telling him that !
I've looked at many ladies with pleasure , and been
But with you it's different .
You're perfect , without a rival in the world , made up of the best qualities of every creature .
I've never known any woman or seen a woman's face , except my own in the mirror .
And I've never met any men besides you and my father .
I'm a prince by birth , Miranda , maybe even a king now ; though I wish I weren't , and normally I wouldn't put up with carrying these logs any more than I'd let flies breed in my mouth .
But I'll tell you something from my soul .
The second I saw you , my heart rushed to serve you and be your slave , so here I am now , a patient log-man .
Do you love me ?
Oh heaven , oh earth , witness what I'm about to say , and reward me if I tell the truth !
If I'm lying , then
More than anything else in the world , I love you , value you , and honor you .
Look at me crying , what a fool I am to cry at what makes me happy .
Why are you crying ?
I'm crying at how unworthy I am to give you what I want to give you and to take what I'm dying to have .
The more I try to hide what I'm feeling , the bigger it gets .
I'll be your wife if you'll have me .
Otherwise , I'll die a virgin , devoted to you .
You can refuse to make me your spouse , but I'll be your servant whether you want me to or not .
You'll be my wife , dearest , and I'll serve you forever .
Will you be my husband , then ?
A million goodbyes to you .
Now it's time to get back to my studying , since I have a lot of serious business to take care of before dinner .
Don't tell me that .
When the barrel's empty , we'll drink water .
Not one drop sooner .
Therefore , drink up. , Servant-monster , drink a toast to me .
Servant monster" ?
What a crazy island this is .
They say there are only five people on it .
We're three of them .
If the other two are as loopy as we are , our country's in bad shape .
Drink when I order you , servant-monster .
Your eyes look like they've sunk into your head .
Where else should his eyes be , if not in his head ?
He'd be quite a monster if his eyes were in his tail .
My man , monster is so drunk he can't talk .
He's not standing straight enough to hold a flag .
We're not going to run in our army , Monsieur Monster .
Or walk either .
You'll just lie there like sleeping dogs and say nothing .
Monster sweetie , be a good monster and just speak once .
How is your Highness ?
Let me lick your shoe .
Lord , " he calls you ?
What an idiot that monster is !
Trinculo , speak politely .
If you mutiny against me , I'll hang you from the next tree .
Thank you , my noble lord .
Now would you please listen once again to the request I made to you earlier ?
I'll stand , and so will Trinculo .
You lie .
Trinculo , if you interrupt him any more , I swear I'll knock some teeth out of your head .
I didn't say anything .
Okay , just stay quiet .
Go on .
I was telling you he used witchcraft to take this island .
He stole it from me .
If your highness is willing , take revenge on him for that , because I know you're brave enough , I don't dare to , That's for sure .
You'll be lord of the island then , and I'll be your servant .
And how would we go about doing that ?
Can you bring me to him ?
Yes , yes , my lord .
I'll take you to where he sleeps , and you can pound a nail into his head .
You lie .
You can't do that .
What an idiot this guy is ! , You're a rotten piece of work ! , I beg your highness , beat him up and take his wine bottle from him .
When he loses that , he'll be drinking salt water , since I'll never tell him where the freshwater springs are .
Trinculo , watch out .
If you interrupt this monster with one more word , I'll beat you like a piece of salted fish .
What did I do ?
I didn't do anything .
I need to get away from you .
Didn't you call him a liar ?
You lie .
I didn't accuse you of lying .
Are you out of your mind and deaf too ?
Damn your wine !
Ha , ha , ha !
Now go ahead and tell me the rest of your story. , Please go stand farther away .
Beat him up .
After a little while , I'll beat him too .
Just as I told you , he usually sleeps in the afternoon .
At that time you can smash in his skull after seizing his books ; or you can bash his skull with a log ; or you can stab him in the belly ; or cut his windpipe .
Just remember to grab his books first , since without them he's just a poor fool like me , and can't command a single spirit .
All the spirits hate him as much as I do .
Be sure to burn his magic books .
He has some wonderful home furnishings , that's what he calls them , that he'll use to decorate his house when he gets one .
The most important thing for you to think about is how beautiful his daughter is .
He says she has no equal .
I never saw a woman except her and Sycorax , my mother .
But Miranda is so much more beautiful , you can't even compare the two .
Is she really that wonderful ?
Yes , my lord .
Monster , I'll kill this man .
His daughter and I will be king and queen , God protect us ! , and you and Trinculo will be our governors. , Do you like that idea , Trinculo ?
Excellent .
Give me your hand .
I'm sorry I hit you .
But try to control your speech .
In a half an hour he'll be asleep .
Will you kill him then ?
Dear father , if you caused this terrible storm with your magic powers , please put an end to it .
The sky's so dark it looks like it would rain down boiling hot tar if the sea weren't swelling up to the sky to put its fire out .
Oh , I suffered along with all the men I watched suffer !
A fine ship , with some good people in it , I'm sure , smashed to pieces .
Their dying shouts broke my heart !
The poor people died .
If I'd been a god I would've let the sea sink inside the earth before it had a chance to swallow up that ship and all the people it was carrying .
Calm down .
There's nothing to get upset about .
No harm was done .
Oh , what a horrible day !
There was no harm , I'm telling you .
It never occurred to me to imagine there was anything more to know .
Yes , I swear .
You make me so happy .
I'm full of joy .
Let's be light-hearted .
I'll do anything you ask , monster , anything reasonable. , Come on , Trinculo , let's sing .
That's not the tune I had in mind .
What's this song ?
Oh , forgive all my sins !
Are you scared ?
No , monster , not me .
Don't be scared .
This'll be a wonderful kingdom to live in , where they play music for free .
As soon as you kill Prospero .
That'll happen soon enough .
I remember the plan .
The sound is going away .
But let's follow it , and then do our dirty work afterward .
Lead us , monster ; we'll follow .
I wish I could see this invisible drummer .
He really plays well .
Are you coming monster ?
My old bones are tired .
We're wandering in a maze .
If you don't mind , I need to rest a bit .
I can't blame you , old lord .
Sit down and rest .
We're searching on land , but he's lost in the sea .
We have to give up and let him go .
What's that music ?
My friends , listen .
What marvelous music !
Heaven help us !
What were those things ?
Now I'll believe that unicorns exist , and that there's a tree in Arabia where the phoenix lives .
Travelers have never told lies , no matter what the fools at home accuse them of .
If I told them about this back in Naples , would they believe me ?
I'd tell them that I saw natives like these , since they must be natives , who are graceful and well-mannered even if they're monstrous to look at , kinder than most human beings you might find , kinder than almost any human .
They vanished strangely .
It's all right , since they left their food behind , and we're hungry .
Would you like to taste the banquet ?
Not me .
I assure you , sir , there's nothing to be afraid of .
Brother , Duke , please have some food .
Oh , it's horrible , horrible .
I thought the clouds were talking to me , the winds were singing to me , and the thunder , like an awful organ pipe , roared Prospero's name .
It sang about my crimes .
I'll go join him there , going down deeper than any anchor ever sank , and lie with him dead in the mud .
I'll fight every one of these devils if I have to , one at a time .
I'll back you up .
All three of them are crazy with despair .
Their guilt is finally starting to gnaw at them , like a slow-acting poison .
Those of you who are young and active , I beg you to follow them and keep them from doing the crazy things their guilt might push them to do .
Follow them , please .
But if you have sex with her before the marriage ceremony takes place , the heavens will not bless your relationship , but will overwhelm you with hate , contempt , and discord , and will poison your marriage bed so that you both grow to loathe it .
You've said it well .
So have a seat and talk to her .
She's yours. , Come , Ariel !
My trusty servant , Ariel !
What does my powerful master wish for ?
I'm here .
You and your fellow spirits did your last assignment well , and now I need your help again .
Go bring them all here ; I give you power over them .
I've promised them I would , and they're expecting it .
Right now ?
Yes , right away .
Before you can say "Come" and "Go , " And breathe twice , and shout "So , so ! " Each one of your servants will rush here ,
It's time for you to know the whole story .
Give me a hand and help me off with this magic cloak .
Not yet." Well , the time has come .
Can you remember the time before you came to live in this shack ?
I doubt it , since you weren't even three at the time .
Sure I can , father .
What do you remember ?
A house , a person ?
Tell me anything you remember .
I love you dearly , Ariel .
Don't come near till you hear me call you .
All right , I understand .
I assure you , sir , the tender love I feel in my heart is stronger than the sexual passions stirring down below .
Good. , Now come , Ariel !
Better to have an extra servant on hand than be understaffed .
Appear before me now quickly , No talking .
Just watch !
Be quiet .
I have come to announce that Juno has asked you , Ceres , goddess of the fields and the earth , to leave your rich farms of wheat , rye , barley , oats , and peas , the hills where the
Why has your queen , Juno , called me here to this grassy spot ?
To celebrate a marriage of true love , and give a gift to the lovers .
Tell me , rainbow , do you know if either Venus , the goddess of love , or her son , Cupid , is accompanying Queen Juno ?
Ever since Venus and her blind son plotted a way for the god of the underworld to steal my daughter away for half the year , I swore I'd never speak to them again .
Don't be afraid of her company .
I met Venus as she was with her son on her way to her home on Paphos , in a carriage pulled by doves .
They were planning to pull a mischievous trick on Ferdinand and Miranda , who have sworn not to sleep together till their wedding day .
But their trick failed .
Venus went home again , and her little son broke all his arrows , swearing he'll never shoot them again , but play with birds like other little boys .
Great Queen Juno is coming .
I know her by her walk .
How is my generous sister ?
Come help me bless this couple , so they will be prosperous and have many children .
This is a majestic and harmonious vision .
Are these spirits we see before us ?
Yes , they're spirits that I've called out of their prisons to perform my whims .
Let me live here forever .
Such a wonderful father-in-law and wife make this place a paradise .
Now be quiet .
Juno and Ceres are whispering about something serious .
There's something else to be done .
Be silent , or else my magic spell will be broken .
Come , sweet nymphs , and help us celebrate the wedding of two true lovers .
Don't be late .
Now , you tanned fieldworkers who are so tired of August's labors , get out of the dirt and come rejoice with us here .
Put your straw hats on , have some fun , and dance with these young nymphs .
The moment they planned to act is almost here .
I've never seen him like this .
We are all made of dreams , and our life stretches from sleep before birth to sleep after death .
Sir , I'm upset .
Please put up with my weakness .
My old brain is troubled .
Don't be disturbed by my illness .
If you like , you can rest a while in my room .
I'll go for a short walk to calm down my feverish mind .
We hope you feel better and find some peace .
Come , Ariel , I summon you with a thought .
Thank you , Ariel .
Come .
I obey all your thoughts .
What do you wish ?
Spirit , we have to get ready to meet with Caliban .
Yes , my master .
When I was putting on the Ceres show , I thought of reminding you about Caliban , but I was afraid of upsetting you .
Tell me again , where did you leave those lowlifes ?
I told you , sir , they were totally drunk , so puffed up with courage that they were getting angry at the air for blowing in their faces , and beating the ground for touching their feet , yet even when drunk , they kept their plan firmly in mind .
Then I beat my drum , at which point they pricked up their ears and opened their eyes , looking around for the source of my music .
I enchanted them so thoroughly that they followed me through thorn bushes and prickly shrubs that tore up their shins .
In the end I left them standing in the smelly pond behind your room , with the stinking water covering them up to their chins .
Good job , my little one .
Stay invisible .
Bring the fancy clothes out of my house , to use as bait to catch these thieves .
I'm going , I'm going .
He's a devil , a born devil , who can never be trained .
As his body grows uglier with age , his mind rots away as well .
I'll torment them all till they roar with pain .
Here , hang them on this clothesline .
Please walk softly , so not even a mole hears us approach .
We're near his room now .
Hey monster , the spirit you've been talking about , the one you call harmless , has been playing tricks on us .
Monster , I smell like horse piss , which is making my nose pretty upset .
Mine too. , Are you listening , monster ?
If I decide to get angry at you , just watch out , You'd be done for then , monster .
My good lord , I still need you to like me .
Be patient , because the prize I'm leading you to will make you forget how smelly you are now .
So be quiet .
It's as silent as a graveyard here .
That upsets me much more than getting wet .
And you called the fairy creature harmless , monster .
Please , my king , be quiet .
Look here , this is the entrance to his room .
Be silent and go in .
Do the deed that will make this island yours forever , and will make me , Caliban , your worshipful foot-licker .
Give me your hand .
I'm starting to feel murderous urges .
Leave it alone , you fool .
It's worthless .
Oh , monster , we know secondhand clothes when we see them. , Take off that gown , Trinculo .
I swear that gown's for me .
You can have it then , your highness .
To hell with this idiot !
Why are you going crazy over these trashy clothes ?
Leave them alone , and do the murder first .
If he wakes up before we kill him , he'll never stop punishing us .
Thank you kindly .
Thank you for that joke .
As king of this country I like to reward wit when I hear it .
Here's another jacket to say thanks .
Come here , monster , put some glue on your fingers , and carry away the rest of these clothes for us .
I won't have any of this .
Monster , use your fingers .
Help us carry these clothes to where my barrel of wine is hidden , or I'll kick you out of my kingdom .
Go on , take them .
Take these too .
Yes , and these .
Hey , Mountain , hey !
Silver .
There they go , Silver !
My memory is hazy , more like a dream than a recollection .
Didn't I use to have four or five women taking care of me ?
Indeed you did , and more besides , Miranda .
But how is it possible that you still remember this , through all the darkness of the past ?
If you remember your life before you came here , you may also remember how you got here .
No , that I don't remember .
Twelve years ago , Miranda , twelve years ago your father was the Duke of Milan , a powerful prince .
Aren't you my father ?
Your mother was extremely virtuous , and she said you were my daughter .
And your father was Duke of Milan , and you were his heir , a princess .
Good lord !
What evil things were done to us that we were driven here ?
Or was it a blessing that we came here ?
Both , both , my girl .
We were pushed out of power by evil deeds , as you call them .
Fury , Fury ! , Get over there , Tyrant , there .
Listen , listen !
Ariel , go order my goblin servants to make these fellows ' bones ache , give them muscle cramps all over , and give them more bruises than leopards have spots .
Listen they're howling .
Hunt them down .
Now all my enemies are at my mercy .
Soon all my work will be done , and you'll be free .
Just obey me a little bit longer .
My plans are almost at their climax .
My spells are working well , my spirits are obeying me , and everything is right on schedule .
What time is it ?
It's after six o'clock , my lord , when you said our work would be finished .
That's what I said when I first conjured the tempest .
Tell me , spirit , how's the king and his entourage ?
All cooped up together , just as you ordered , all imprisoned in the grove of linden trees that protects your room from bad weather .
They can't move till you release them .
The king , his brother , and your brother are all waiting there in a crazed state of mind , and the rest are grieving over them , sad and astonished .
Good old lord Gonzalo , " as you call him , is saddest of all , with tears running down his beard .
Your magic spell has such an effect on them that if you saw them now , you'd feel sorry for them .
Do you think so , spirit ?
I'd feel sorry for them , if I were human .
I will too .
It's better to act virtuously rather than vengefully .
Go release them , Ariel .
I'll break my spells and bring them back to their senses , and they'll feel like themselves again .
I'll go get them , sir .
With his own lightning bolts ; I've shaken up the sturdy cliffs and uprooted pines and cedars ; I've opened up graves and awakened the corpses sleeping in them , letting them out with my powerful magic .
But I surrender all this magic now , when I've summoned some heavenly music to cast a spell , as I'm doing now , I'll break my staff and bury it far underground , and throw my book of magic spells deeper into the sea than any anchor ever sank .
Let this solemn melody comfort your fevered minds , which are now useless , seething inside your skulls. , All of you stand there in my spell. ,
Why , that's my dainty Ariel singing now .
I'll miss you , Ariel , but you'll be free. , Yes , you will , yes. , Go to the king's ship in your invisible state .
This place is full of trouble , torments , and amazements .
There must be a strange explanation for this , if it's true .
I surrender your dukedom and beg you to forgive me all my crimes .
But how is it possible that Prospero's alive and well and living on this island ?
I won't bet on whether or not any of this is real .
Welcome , my friends .
It's the devil speaking through him .
You suffered a loss like mine ?
Yes , just as great and just as recent .
And I have much less to comfort me than you do , since I've lost my daughter .
A daughter ?
Oh God , I wish the two of them were alive and living in Naples , as king and queen !
I'd give up my life and take my son's place in the mud on the ocean floor if I could see them alive in Naples. , When did you lose your daughter ?
In this recent storm .
These lords seem so astonished that they've lost their use of reason and can hardly believe what they see with their own eyes. , But whatever the reason for your losing your senses , you can know for sure that I'm Prospero , that same duke who was kicked out of Milan and landed on this same island where you landed , and became the lord of it .
No , my dearest love , I wouldn't cheat you for the whole world .
If this dream vision is typical of what this island conjures up , then I'll lose my son twice .
A wonderful miracle !
Receive all the blessings of a happy father .
Get up and tell me how you came here .
How amazing !
How many wonderful creatures there are here !
Mankind is so beautiful !
Oh , what a wonderful new world , that has such people in it !
It's new to you .
No , sir , she's human .
But by the grace of God , she's mine .
I chose her for my wife when I thought I had no father to ask advice of .
She's the daughter of this famous Duke of Milan I heard so much about but never saw before .
He's given me a second life , and marrying her makes him a second father to me .
And I'm her father as well .
But oh , how odd it is to have to ask for my child's forgiveness !
Stop right there , sir .
Let's not get gloomy in our reminiscing , since there's no reason for sadness anymore .
Oh , it breaks my heart to think how painful it must be for you to recall all this , things that I can't remember .
But please tell me more .
My brother , your uncle Antonio , just listen to this ( I still can't believe a brother could be so disloyal !
My brother whom , aside from you , I loved more than anyone else in the world , I trusted to run my state , which at that time was the strongest in the land , and Prospero the number one duke , famous for my dignity and my education .
Since I was so drawn to studying things like logic , grammar , geometry , and astronomy , I let my control of the government slide a bit , being too wrapped up in my occult books .
Your disloyal uncle , are you paying attention ?
I'm hanging on every word .
Oh , yes I am , father .
Dear gods , bless this couple , since you're the ones who have shown us the path that led us here .
Amen to that , Gonzalo .
Was the Duke of Milan kicked out of Milan so his children could become kings of Naples ?
Oh , this is cause for an extraordinary joy that should be engraved in gold on pillars to last forever .
On one and the same trip Claribel found a husband in Tunis , and Ferdinand , her brother , found a wife where he was shipwrecked ; Prospero found his dukedom on a poor island ; and all of us found ourselves when we lost control of ourselves .
So be it .
Amen .
Oh , look , sir , look , sir !
More of us are here .
The best news of all is that we've located our king and our men .
The next bit of good news is that our ship , which we gave up for ruined only three hours ago , is as well-outfitted and seaworthy as it was when we first set sail .
These are unnatural events .
In an instant we were separated from them , as if in a dream , and brought here in a daze .
This is a stranger business than men have ever set foot in before , and it's not natural either .
We need some oracle to tell us what's going on .
Sir , my king , don't waste your time mulling over how strange this business is .
How is my lord ?
If I can believe my eyes , this is a fine sight to see .
Oh Setebos , these are handsome spirits !
How wonderful my master is !
I'm afraid he'll punish me .
Ha , ha !
What are these things we're looking at , my lord Antonio ?
Can you buy them with money ?
He'll kill me with tortures .
Isn't this Stephano , my drunken butler ?
He's definitely drunk now .
Where did he get wine ?
And Trinculo's drunk .
How are you doing , Stephano ?
Oh , don't touch me .
I'm not Stephano , I'm a walking cramp .
You wanted to be king of the island , sir ?
I would've been a sore king then .
He's as ugly in his manners as he is in appearance. , I will indeed .
And after this I'll be good and hope you forgive me .
What an idiot I was to think this drunkard was a god and to worship such a stupid fool !
Go away , now .
Or stole it , rather .
And in the morning I'll take you to your ship and we'll sail to Naples , where I hope to see this loving couple married .
I'm dying to hear your life story , which must be a strange tale .
Now my spells are all broken , And the only power I have is my own , Which is very weak .
Release me So I can return to my dukedom With your help .
Just as you'd like to have your sins forgiven , Indulge me , forgive me , and set me free .
Please listen to me carefully .
As I neglected practical matters , being totally dedicated to solitude and to improving my mind with subjects more valuable than most people imagine , I was so shut away from the world that I unwittingly stirred up evil wishes in my disloyal brother .
My deep trust in him made him deeply untrustworthy , arousing in him a treachery as big as my trust was , my trust which had no limit , an infinite confidence .
With his ambition growing like this , do you hear what I'm saying ?
Of course I hear it .
My library was a large enough dukedom for me .
Good heavens !
Think about that , and about what followed afterward .
Then tell me if Antonio can be called a brother .
It would be wrong for me to think poorly of my grandmother .
The king of Naples , my arch-enemy , listens to my brother's request , which was that the king , in exchange for the respect and money paid to him , would get rid of me and make my brother Duke of Milan instead .
How awful !
I can't remember how I cried then , but I'll cry all over again .
This story breaks my heart .
Just listen a little more , and I'll bring you up to date about the present situation , which is the whole reason I'm telling you this story in the first place .
Why didn't they just kill us that night ?
Good question , my girl .
My story does raise that question .
The answer , my dear , is that they didn't dare , because the people of Milan loved me too much .
God , what a burden on you I must have been !
No , my dear , you were a little angel who kept me going .
You smiled with a strength you must have gotten from heaven , while I cried salty tears into the salty sea , and groaned at our situation .
How did we manage to get ashore ?
With God's help .
We had a little food and fresh water that a nobleman from Naples , Gonzalo , had given us out of the kindness of his heart .
Knowing how much I loved my books , he gave me some books from my library that I value more than my dukedom .
I wish I could see that man someday !
Now I'll stand up .
May God thank you for it .
But please , father , the question is still nagging at me , why did you conjure up this storm ?
You should know this : much luck is on my side , and my enemies have happened to wreck their ship on this island .
Now , no more questions .
It's a nice hazy feeling , so give in to it .
I know you have no choice .
Come on , servant , come .
I'm ready now .
Come here , Ariel .
Humble greetings , great master !
Worthy sir , greetings !
Spirit , did you carry out the storm just as I ordered ?
Sometimes I appeared in many places at once .
I flashed about faster than lightning .
Good spirit !
Boatswain !
I'm here , sir .
Hurry , hurry !
Come on , men !
That's the way to do it !
Where's the Master ?
Make these men work .
Please stay below deck , sir .
Where's the Master , Boatswain ?
Everyone there got a little crazy and pulled some desperate stunts .
Everyone except the sailors dove into the sea , leaving behind the ship that I had set on fire .
The king's son , Ferdinand , with his hair standing straight up , it looked like reeds , not hair , was the first person to jump , shouting , "Hell is empty , and all the devils are here ! " Good job !
But was this near the shore ?
Very near , my master .
But are they all safe , Ariel ?
Nobody was hurt in the slightest .
Even their clothes are unstained , and look fresher than before the storm .
I've separated them into groups around the island , just as you ordered .
I sent the king's son off by himself to a faraway nook on the island , where he's sitting now sighing , with his arms crossed like this .
Tell me what you did with the king's ship , the sailors , and the other ships .
The sailors are all below deck , sleeping both from their labor and from a magic spell I cast over them .
As for the rest of the ships , I scattered them , and they've gathered again in the Mediterranean , sailing sadly home to Naples , believing that they witnessed the shipwreck and death of their great king .
Ariel , you've done your work exactly as I ordered .
But there's more work to be done .
What time is it ?
Past noon .
At least two hours past .
We can't waste time between now and six o'clock .
Is there more work to do ?
Since you're giving me new assignments , let me remind you what you promised me but haven't come through with yet .
What ?
You're in a bad mood ?
What could you possibly ask for ?
My freedom .
Before your sentence has been completed ?
Don't say anything else .
I beg you , remember the good work I've done for you , and how I've never lied to you , never made mistakes , and never grumbled in my work .
You promised to take a full year off my sentence .
Have you forgotten the torture I freed you from ?
No .
You have forgotten , and you think it's a burden when I ask you to walk through the ocean , or run on the north wind , or do business for me underground when the earth's frozen solid .
No , I don't , sir .
You lie , you nasty , ungrateful thing !
Have you forgotten the horrid witch Sycorax , stooped over with old age and ill will ?
Have you forgotten her ?
No , sir .
You have .
Where was she born ?
Speak .
Tell me .
In Algiers , sir .
Oh , was she now ?
I'll have to tell the story again every month , since you seem to forget it .
This damned witch Sycorax was kicked out of Algiers for various witching crimes too terrible for humans to hear about .
But for one reason they refused to execute her .
Isn't that true ?
Yes , sir .
This sunken-eyed hag was brought here pregnant and left by the sailors .
You , my slave , were her servant at the time , as you admit yourself .
In a fit of rage she locked you up in a hollow pine tree , with the help of her powerful assistants , and left you there for twelve years .
That's right , you stupid thing .
Caliban , who now serves me .
It was my magic that saved you when I arrived on the island and heard you , making the pine tree open and let you out .
Thank you , master .
If you complain any more , I'll split an oak tree and lock you up in it till you've howled for twelve years .
Please forgive me , master .
I'll be obedient and do all my tasks without complaining .
Do that , and I'll set you free in two days .
That's noble of you , master .
What shall I do for you ?
Just tell me .
What shall I do ?
Go disguise yourself as a sea nymph .
Be invisible to everyone except yourself and me .
Take this garment , put it on , and then come back here .
Hurry , go !
Shake off your sleepiness .
Come on .
We'll go visit Caliban , my slave who always talks to us so nastily .
But even so , we can't do without him .
He builds our fires , gets our firewood , and does all kinds of useful things for us. , Hey !
Caliban !
Pile of dirt !
Say something .
Come out , I order you .
There's other work for you to do .
Come on , you turtle !
What a fine sight !
My dear clever Ariel , listen carefully .
My lord , I'll do it right away .
I hope you both get drenched with a dew as evil as what my mother used to collect with a crow's feather from the poison swamps .
May a hot southwest wind blow on you and cover you with blisters all over .
I'll give you cramps for saying that , horrible pains in your sides that will keep you from breathing .
I'll send goblins out at night to work their nasty deeds on you .
You'll be pricked all over , and it'll sting like bees .
I have to eat my dinner now .
This island belongs to me because Sycorax , my mother , left it to me .
I curse myself for doing that !
You liar , you respond better to the whip than to kindness !
I took good care of you , piece of filth that you are , and let you stay in my own hut until you tried to rape my daughter .
Oh ho , oh ho !
I wish I had !
You stopped me .
You horrid slave , you can't be trained to be good , and you're capable of anything evil !
I pitied you , worked hard to teach you to speak , and taught you some new thing practically every hour .
But you had bad blood in you , no matter how much you learned , and good people couldn't stand to be near you .
So you got what you deserved , and were locked up in this cave , which is more fitting for the likes of you than a prison would be .
You taught me language , and all I can do with it is curse .
Damn you for teaching me your language !
No , please .
Go then , slave .
The watchdogs bark .
Listen , listen !
Where's that music coming from ?
From the earth , or the air ?
It's stopped now , it must be played for some local god of the island .
As I sat on the shore crying over my father's shipwreck , I heard the music creep over the wild waves , calming their fury and soothing my own grief with its sweet melodies .
I followed it here , or I should say it dragged me here .
But now it's stopped .
No , there it is again .
Listen , I hear them .
This song's about my dead father .
I hear it now overhead .
What is it ?
A spirit ?
Lord , it's glancing every which way !
How handsome it is .
It must be a spirit .
No , girl !
It eats and sleeps and has the same five senses we do .
He's lost his comrades and is wandering around looking for them .
He's busy , can't you hear him giving orders ?
You're getting in the way of our work .
Stay in your cabins .
You're helping the storm , not us .
Don't get wound up , my good man .
Now get out of here !
Go to your cabins and be quiet !
Don't bother us up here .
Just remember who you've got on board with you , good man .
Nobody I care about more than myself .
You're a king's advisor .
Go ahead , use your authority .
If you can't do it , be grateful you've lived this long and go wait to die in your cabin , if it comes to that. , Harder , men ! , Now get out of our way , I'm telling you .
I feel a lot better after talking to this guy .
I could imagine he's divine , since I never saw anything so noble-looking on earth before .
I'm not marvelous , sir , but I'm certainly a maiden .
She speaks my language !
My God , I'm the highest-ranking person who speaks this language , if only we were back where it's spoken .
What's that ?
The highest-ranking ?
What would the King of Naples do if he heard you say that ?
He would just see me for what I am , a person amazed to hear you talking about Naples .
He does hear me , and that makes me cry .
I myself am the King of Naples , since I saw with my own eyes , these eyes that haven't been dry since , my father killed in a shipwreck .
Ah , how pitiful !
Yes , indeed , and all the King's men , the Duke of Milan and his fine son too .
Hang on , sir !
Just a moment .
If the devil had such a beautiful house as his body , then good things would fight to live in it .
What's that ?
Get out of that position , because I can disarm you with my magic wand and make your sword drop .
Please , father , I beg you .
Let go of me !
Don't tug on my clothes .
Father , take pity on him .
Quiet !
If you say one more word , I'll punish you , maybe even hate you .
You're defending an impostor ?
You think he's special , since you've only ever seen him and Caliban .
Foolish girl , in the eyes of most people this man's a Caliban , and compared to him , they're angels .
Then my love is humble .
I don't feel any urge to see a more handsome man than this one .
That's true , they are .
My strength is all gone , as if in a dream .
The death of my father , my physical weakness , the loss of all my friends , the threats of this man who's taken me prisoner , all that would be easy for me to take , if only I could look through my prison windows once a day and see this girl .
A prison like that would give me enough liberty .
Please say no more .
What a pain .
Pain , yes indeed .
You thought you were being funny , but you said the truth .
You're taking it more seriously than I meant it .
Well , I'm nearly finished .
Which one will start yammering first , Gonzalo or Adrian ?
The old guy .
I pick the younger one .
You're on .
What's the prize ?
A good laugh .
It's a deal !
Though this island may appear desolate ,
The island must be mild , and have a temperate climate .
I knew Temperance , she was a fine girl .
Yes , and she was mild too .
There's always a breath of fresh air here .
Stinking like a swamp .
This island contains everything beneficial to life .
True .
Everything except something to live on .
There's little or nothing of that .
Look how lush and healthy the grass is !
How green !
The ground is brown .
With a touch of green in it .
He doesn't miss a thing .
No , he just gets reality completely wrong .
But the really unbelievable thing is , and this is incredible , As most unbelievable things are .
That our clothes were drenched with sea water , but they came out looking brand-new .
Or stuff what he says into their pockets .
Seriously , I think our clothes are as fresh now as they were the day we put them on in Africa , when we attended the marriage of the king's daughter Claribel to the King of Tunis .
It was a lovely wedding , and we're doing really well on our trip home .
Tunis has never had such a beautiful queen .
Next thing you know , he'll be saying "widower Aeneas." "Widow Dido , " did you say ?
I'm not sure about that .
Dido was from Carthage , not Tunis .
Carthage ?
I'm telling you , it was Carthage .
Gonzalo is a miracle-worker .
What miracle will he work next ?
I think he'll carry this island home in his pocket and give it to his son like an apple .
And then throw the seeds in the sea , to make more islands grow .
Yes indeed .
Absolutely , yes indeed .
Bring down that top sail !
Fast !
Let the ship sail close to the wind .
Damn those men shouting down there !
They're louder than the storm or us sailors .
Oh , not you again .
What do you want ?
Should we all give up and drown ?
Do you want to sink ?
Yes , I guarantee he won't drown , even if this ship were as fragile as an eggshell and as leaky as a menstruating woman .
Turn the ship to the wind !
It's no use !
We're done for !
The most beautiful queen they ever had .
I beg your pardon , except for the widow Dido .
Oh , except for the widow Dido ?
That's right , except for the widow Dido .
Isn't my vest just as clean and fresh as the day I put it on ?
In a way , I mean .
In a way" is the right way to go .
I mean when I wore it at your daughter's wedding .
You keep cramming words into my ears that I don't want to hear .
Sir , he may still be alive .
I have no doubt he got ashore alive .
No , no , he's dead .
Please be quiet .
We all begged you not to go ahead with those marriage plans , and your lovely daughter struggled between disgust at marrying an African and the desire to obey you .
Now I'm afraid we've lost your son forever .
Our shipwreck has made more women widows in Milan and Naples than there are survivors to comfort them .
And it's all your fault .
And the greatest sorrow is mine too .
My lord Sebastian , even though what you say is true , your way of saying it is tactless and comes at the wrong time .
You're rubbing salt in his wounds when you should be applying bandages .
All right , I'll stop .
Like a good doctor .
Bad times ?
Yes , very bad .
If I could colonize this island , my lord , He'd cultivate weeds on it .
Or thorn-bushes .
And if I were king of it , you know what I'd do ?
He wouldn't get drunk much , since there's no wine here .
I wouldn't allow any commerce .
There'd be no work .
There'd be no kingship , He wants to be king in a place with no kingship .
Everything would be produced without labor , and would be shared by all .
Nature would produce its harvests in abundance , to feed my innocent people .
There'd be no marriage ?
No .
Oh , please be quiet .
You're absolutely right , your highness .
It's you we were laughing at .
Ouch , what a comeback !
Too bad it fell flat .
You're brave gentlemen .
You'd give the moon a shove if it got stuck five weeks in its orbit .
That's right , and then after we fixed the moon , we'd go bird-hunting .
I'm not .
Go to sleep , and listen to us laughing .
What , everybody falls asleep so fast ?
I wish I could sleep too , it would stop me from thinking .
Come to think of it , I am feeling sleepy .
In that case you should sleep .
The two of us will guard you while you sleep , my lord , and keep you safe .
Thank you .
I'm terribly sleepy .
How strange that they all got so sleepy !
There must be something in the air here .
So why aren't our eyelids heavy ?
I'm not sleepy at all .
Me neither .
I'm wide awake .
They all fell asleep together , as if they'd planned it .
Opportunity's knocking for you , and in my imagination I see a crown dropping onto your head .
Are you dreaming or awake ?
Don't you hear me speaking ?
I do , and it sounds like you're talking in your sleep .
What did you say ?
You're snoring , but it sounds like you're talking .
There's meaning in your snoring .
I'll show you how .
You need to .
Oh , if you only knew how close to success you are , even while you make fun of what I'm telling you !
The more you joke about it , the more clearly I feel how serious it is !
Lazy people end up at the bottom , and you deserve to be at the top .
Please , tell me more .
Yes , I'm sure he's dead .
I've got no hope that he survived .
But in that "no hope" there are great hopes for you !
Do you agree that Ferdinand must have drowned ?
He's dead .
So , in that case , tell me who's next in line to inherit the kingdom of Naples ?
Claribel , his daughter .
It's true that my brother's daughter is Queen of Tunis , and heir of Naples .
I could do it myself .
Do you even get what I'm saying ?
I think I do .
And does this prospect of good fortune make you happy ?
I remember you took the throne from your brother Prospero .
My brother's servants used to be my equals .
Now they work for me .
But what about your guilty conscience ?
Yes .
I don't feel anything .
As
for the other men , we can make them believe anything we choose .
They'll set their watches to whatever time we say .
You'll be my role model .
Just as you got Milan , I'll get Naples .
Take out your sword .
With one cut you can be through paying money to Naples .
And as king I'll love you forever .
You take out your sword too .
When I raise my hand , you do the same , and bring it down on Gonzalo's head .
Oh , but there's one more thing to tell you .
What , we're going to die ?
The king and the prince are praying .
I'm out of patience .
This bigmouth jerk here , ( He'll still die by hanging , not drowning , even if every drop of water in the sea tries to swallow him .
Let's all sink with the king .
Let's say goodbye to him .
Let's act quickly .
Why are your swords out ?
Why do you look like that ?
What's this all about ?
While we were here guarding you as you slept , we heard a loud roar that sounded like bulls , or lions .
Didn't you hear it ?
We heard it very clearly .
I didn't hear anything .
Oh , it was a monstrous roar , to make the earth tremble !
I'm sure there was a herd of lions nearby .
Did you hear this , Gonzalo ?
It's true I heard a humming sound , a strange one , which woke me up .
I shook you and shouted at you , sir .
When I opened my eyes , I saw their swords out .
There was a noise , that's certainly true .
Let's draw our own swords too .
I hope those lions stay far away from him .
I'm sure he's somewhere on the island .
Get us out of here .
His spirits are listening to me , but I can't help cursing him anyway .
They won't pinch me , frighten me , push me in the mud , or mislead me unless he tells them to .
Sometimes snakes wrap around me , hissing at me with their forked tongues till I go crazy .
Hey , look over there !
Maybe he won't see me .
There are no bushes or shrubs to protect me from the weather here .
And there's another storm brewing , I can hear it in the way the wind whistles .
That huge black cloud over there looks like a filthy liquor jug that's about to pour out its contents .
A strange fish .
If I were in England now , like I was once , and I had even a painted picture of this fish , every fool there would give me a piece of silver to look at it .
In England this strange monster would be just like a man .
Any strange beast there can be considered a man .
The men there won't give a penny to a lame beggar , but they'll pay ten cents to look at a freak show exhibit .
This guy has legs like a man but fins for arms !
And he's still warm , by God .
I guess this is not a fish , but a native who got struck by lightning just now .
Oh , here comes the storm again .
The best thing to do is crawl under his cloak .
There's no other shelter around here .
In emergencies you meet the strangest folks .
I'll just stay here till the storm passes .
This is a rotten song to sing at a man's funeral .
At least I've got some booze to comfort me .
Don't hurt me .
Oh !
What's going on ?
Do we have devils on the island ?
Are you playing tricks on me by showing me savages and uncivilized men from the Indies , ha ?
I didn't survive a shipwreck so I could be scared of your four legs now .
The spirit is torturing me .
Oh !
This is some monster of the island , with four legs , who seems to me to have some kind of ache .
How the hell does he know our language ?
I'll help out , if only because he speaks the same language as me .
If I can cure him from his fever and tame him , and get him back to Naples , he'd make a great present for any emperor .
Don't hurt me , please .
I promise I'll carry the wood faster .
He's having a fit and talking nonsense .
I'll give him some liquor .
If he's never drunk it before , it'll help soothe his fever .
If I can tame him , I'll charge as much as I can get for him .
He'll bring a lot of money to the person who owns him , that's for sure .
